
PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES 
Vol. XXVII 


NEZAMI : 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 







THE OLD WOMAN AND SAN JAR 

fenuryWalktr-Jj-dj,h sc. 

















MAKHZANOL ASRAR 

THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


TRANSLATED FOR THE FIRST TIME FROM 
THE PERSIAN, WITH AN INTRODUCTORY 
ESSAY ON THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI, 


GHOLAM HOSEIN DARAB, M.A. (Lond.) 

Senior Lecturer in Persian, School of Oriental and African 
Studies, University of London, Recognised Teacher of the 
University of London. 


ARTHUR PROBSTHAIN 
41 Great Russell Street, London, W.G. 




























PREFACE 


No apology is needed for presenting this book to the 
English-speaking people, rather is it due for not pre¬ 
senting this greatest gem of Persian literature before, 
■i, Undoubtedly, Nezaini’s poetry has given the great 
,< painters of Persia and India their inspiration. I was 
-hoping to reproduce here, in colour, a few of the beau- 
1 tiful relevant miniatures belonging to the collection of 
5 Mr. Chester Beatty or to the British Museum. Both 
i:Mr. Chester Beatty and the Trustees of the British 
Museum were willing to let me use their priceless 
treasures, but as they explained, these treasures were 
buried deep down in the earth somewhere safe from 
bombing, and it was, therefore, quite impossible to have 
any access to them during the war. By permission of 
Mr. Chester Beatty, however, I was able to have a repro- 
I duction made in photogravure of the scene which is the 
j frontispiece. For this permission I express my thanks 
o. to him. 

° J My object in this book is to present beautiful and 
S hitherto unrevealed ideas to English poets, so that they, 
^ with the inspiration they get from them, might produce 
y? something even greater than Fitzgerald’s version of the 
5 quatrains of Omar Khaiyam, or the beautiful versifica- 
S tion of Rostam and Sohrab by Matthew Arnold. 

I have been engaged for some time in the preparation 
§ of a commentary on ‘ ‘ The Treasury of Mysteries ’ ’, and I 
10 hope it will be ready in due course. Those who under- 
£ stand the nature of such a work will forgive me if I have 
i'not been able to have it published now together with 
the translation. 








VI 


PREFACE 


My thanks are due to my wife who, notwithstanding 
her long hours of war w'ork and home duties, found time 
to read the proofs of this work with me. I have also to 
thank Mr. Probsthain, my publisher, who also willingly 
helped with reading the proofs and checking the Index. 
He is highly experienced in this work, and I should like 
to take this opportunity of congratulating him on his meat 
painstaking, thoroughness, and keen observation. I take, 
of course, on myself all the blame and responsibilities for 
any mistakes which may be found in this book. I must 
also take this opportunity of thanking my printer, Mr. 
Robert Stockwell, who, notwithstanding the many war¬ 
time difficulties, undertook the printing of this work 
with great efficiency. 

The system of transliteration used in this volume is 
my own. It is the one I introduced after studying 
phonetics for some years with Professor Daniel Jones 
of University College. It is quite different from the 
system used by the Royal Geographical Society and other 
learned Societies. It is unconventional, but more 
phonetic. It is not exactly in accordance with the system 
of the International Phonetic Association either, which 
I myself introduced some years ago. It is, I am certain, 
an improvement on it, a slight compromise between the 
rigid scientific phonetic system and the unsatisfactory 
and wrong but conventional one. This subject of 
Persian phonetics is fully discussed in a book which I 
have prepared and shall soon make available to those 
interested in the matter. It is sufficient to say here that 
no distinction is made between the different t, s, h, and z 
sounds, but ch, kh, sir, gh, and q are purposely used here 
for their equivalents in Persian, so as not to give too 
great a shock to those accustomed to the old system of 










PREFACE 


vii 

transliteration. The vowels are i, e, a, a, o, and u, and 
the dipthongs ei, ai, ai, oi, ui, and ou. I have also 
compromised with a certain number of words which have 
been used often in English, e.g. Teheran, Ispahan, 
Sultan, Sunni, etc. I have also omitted the link (ezafeh) 
between certain words, as I thought this to be an 
improvement. 

The pages and lines mentioned in “ The Life and 
Times of Nezami of (xairjeh ” refer to the Khamseh of 
Nezami, lithographed in Teheran in A.H. 1316 (A.D. 1898). 
There are a few pages duplicated in this edition. These 
are marked with * when mentioned. The number of lines 
referred to are those counted downwards and not across 
the page where there are two couplets in each line. I 
did not take the same edition as the text for my trans¬ 
lation of the Makhzanol Asrar, because this edition is 
rather rare. I have, therefore, taken the Teheran printed 
edition of 1313 solar (A.D. 1934), printed by Vahid 
Dastgerdi, as my text. This edition is well printed, cheap, 
and easily obtainable. The numbers against the couplets 
in the Makhzanol Asrar refer to this edition. When 
using the text with my translation, the couplets in the 
Teheran printed edition should be numbered right 
through. The numbers in brackets in the Treasury of 
Mysteries refer to the pages of this edition. 

There are two or three lines which occur more than 
once in the text, e.g. line 415, page 115, and line 457 , 
page 118, and I have translated these accordingly. 

G. H. DARAB. 

Eern Lodge, 

St. Mary Cray, Kent. 

November, 1944. 




















LIST OF WORKS USED 


Nezami. 


Manuscripts 

Khamseli. British Museum MS. Or. 1216. 


do. 

Or. 1363. 

do. 

Add. 7729. 

do. 

Add. 16,780. 

do. 

Add. 16,782. 

do. 

Add. 19,500. 

do. 

Add. 25,799. 

do. 

Add. 25,900. 

do. 

Add. 26,146. 

do. 

Add. 26,147. 

do. 

Add. 27,260. 


India Office MS. 402. 


Persian historical works : 

Juzjani, Menhaj Seraj. Tabaqat Naseri. British Museum 
MS. Add. 26,189. 

Haji Khalifeh. Taqvimot Tavarikh. Persian transla¬ 
tion. British Museum MS. Add. 23,886. 

Hamdellah Mostorffi. Tarikh Gozideh. British Museum 
MS. Add. 22,693. 

Khand Amir, son of Mir Khand. Kholasatol Akhbar. 

British Museum MS. Or. 1292. 

Mir Khand, son of Khavand Shah. Rouzatos Safa. 

British Museum MS. Add. 16,672. 

Rashid Tabib. Jame’ot Tavarikh. British Museum MS. 
Add. 7628. 

Sadeq, son of Saleh of Ispahan. Sobh Sadeq. British 
Museum MS. Or. 1728. 

Lithographed and printed editions 
Nezami. Khamseh. Lithographed. Bombay, A.D. 1834. 











X 


LIST OF WORKS 


Nezami. Khamseh. Lithographed. Teheran, A.H. 

1299-1300 (A.D. 1881-1882). 

Nezami. Khamseh. Lithographed. Teheran, A.H. 
1316 (A.D. 1898). 

Nezami. Makhzanol Asrar. Edited by Nathaniel Bland. 
London, 1844. 

Nezami. Makhzanol Asrar. Lithographed. Cawnpore, 
A.D. 1872. 

Nezami. Makhzanol Asrar. In : Complete Works, 
edited and printed by Vahid Dastgerdi. Teheran, 
A.H. 1313-1318 solar (A.D. 1934-1939). 

Persian historical, biographical, and other works : 

Ahmad Ali. Haft Asman. Edited by H. Blochmann. 
Calcutta, 1873. 

Amir Khosrou of Delhi. Matla’ol Anvar. Lithographed. 

Lucknow, A.H. 1303 (A.D. 1884). 

Arefi. Hal Nameh. Edited by E. S. Greenshields. 
London, 1932. 

Attar, Faridod Din. Manteqot Teir. Edited by Garcin 
de Tassy. Paris, 1842. 

Doulat Shah. Tazkeratosh Sho’ara. Edited by E. G. 
Browne. London, 1901. 

Ferdousi. Yusof va Zoleikha. Edited by H. Ethe. 
Oxford, 1908. 

Hafez. Divan. Lithographed. Lucknow, A.D. 1918. 
Hafez. Divan. Printed. Teheran, A.H. 1315 solar 
(A.D. 1936-1937). 

Haji Lotf Ali Beig. Atash Kadeh. Lithographed. Cal¬ 
cutta, A.H. 1249 (A.D. 1833). 

Jami. Baharestan. Edited by 0. von Schlechta- 
Wssehrd. Wien, 1846. 

Jami. Nafahatol Ons. Edited by W. Nassau Lees. 
Calcutta, A.D. 1859. 

Jami. Tohfatol Ahrar. Edited by Forbes Falconer. 
London, 1848. 











LIST OF WORKS 


XI 


Jovaini, Ala’od Din Malek. Tarikh Jahan Gosha. 
Edited by Mirza Mohammad Qazwini. Part II. 
Leiden, 1916. 

Khand Amir, son of Mir Khand. Hahibos Seyar. Litho¬ 
graphed. Bombay, A.H. 1271-1273 (A.D. 1854- 
1856). 

Mirza, Fath Ali Khan. Shahanshah Nameh. Litho¬ 
graphed. Bombay, A.D. 1864. 

Qasemi. Shah Nameh. Lithographed. Lucknow, 
A.D, 1870. 

Ravandi, Mohammad. Rahatos Sodur. Edited by Mo¬ 
hammad Iqbal. Leiden, 1921. 

Bumi, Jalalod Din. Masnavi. Edited, translated, etc., 
by B. A. Nicholson. 8 vols. Leiden, 1925-1940. 

Sana’i. Hadiqeh. Edited and translated by J. Stephen¬ 
son. Calcutta, 1910. 

European works : 

Browne, E. G. A Literary History of Persia. Vol. II. 
London, 1920. 

Encyclopaedia, of Islam. 

Hadi Hasan. Falalri-i-Shirwani : his Times, Life, and 
Works. London, 1929. 

Lane-Poole, S. The Mohammedan Dynasties. London, 
1894. 

Zambaur, E. de. Manuel de Genealogie et de Chrono¬ 
logic pour l’histoire de l’lslam. Hanover, 1912. 

























CONTENTS 


Preface • ■ • • • • ••• •" ' ; ' 

List of Works used ... ••• ••• ••• 

The Life and Times of Nezami of Ganjeh 

Material from Makhzanol Asrar. 

Material from Khosrou Shirin . 

Material from Leili and Majnun ... 

Material from Bahram Nameh or Haft Peikar .. 
Material from the Book of Alexander : 

(a) Sharaf Nameh. 

( b ) Eqbal Nameh . 

The Abbasid Caliphs of Baghdad. 

The Great Saljuqs and the Kharazm _Shahs _ 

The Saljuqs of Irak, Hordes tan and Azarbaijan .. 

The Atabeks of Azarbaijan ... ... . 

The Fatemid Caliphs of Egypt . 

The Assassins 

The Ghaznavid Empire . 

Makhzanol Askar : The Treasury of Mysteries 


page 

v 

ix 

1-87 

7 

16 

32 

38 

43 

55 

66 

70 

72 

78 

81 

84 

85 

89-251 


First Prayer 

On punishment and the wrath of God ... ... 93 

Second Prayer 

On the bounty and forgiveness of God ... ... 96 


In praise of the Holy Prophet, the prayers of God 

be upon him and upon his family . 

On the Ascension ... 

The first eulogy (to the Prophet) ... . 

The second eulogy (to the Prophet) . 

The third eulogy (to the Prophet) . 

The fourth eulogy (to the Prophet)... 

In praise of King Fakhrod Din Bahram Shah, the 
son of Davud ... 

The discourse on audience (to the king) ... 


97 

99 

104 

105 
108 
110 

113 

115 












XIV 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

On the honour and dignity of this book ... ... 117 

Discourse on the excellence of speech ■... ... 120 

The superiority of poetry to prose ... ... ... 122 

Describing the night and cognizing the Heart ... 127 

The First Seclusion 

To nourish the Heart ... ... ... ... 133 

The fruit of the first seclusion ... ... ... 138 

The Second Seclusion 

On the revelry of the night ... ... ... ... 140 

The fruit of the second seclusion ... ... ... 144 

The First Discourse 

On the creation of Adam ... ... ... ... 147 

The story of the king who despaired, and of how 

he was forgiven ... ... ... ... 152 

Second Discourse 

On advising the king to uphold justice ... ... 154 

The story of Nushirvan and his visier. 157 

Third Discourse 

On the changing world ... ... ... ... 160 

The story of Solomon and the farmer ... ... 164 

Fourth Discourse 

On the good behaviour of kings to their subjects ... 165 

The story of the old woman and Sultan Sanjar ... 167 

Fifth Discourse 

On the description of old age ... ... ... 170 

The story of the old brick-maker ... ... ... 173 

Sixth Discourse 

On the importance of creation ... ... ... 174 

The story of the dog, the hunter, and the fox ... 177 

Seventh Discourse 

On the superiority of mankind over animals ... 180 

The story of Fereidun and the gazelle ... ... 183 










CONTENTS 


XV 


Eighth Discourse 

On creation ... 

The story of the fruit-seller and the fox ... 

Ninth Discourse 

On the abandonment of worldly dignities. 

The story of the ascetic who broke his vow 

Tenth Discourse 
On the appearance of the last day ... 

The story of Jesus ... 

Eleventh Discourse 
On the untrustworthiness of this world 
The story of the spiritually minded Magian priest 

Twelfth Discourse 

On the farewell to the earthly abode 

The story of the two contending philosophers 

Thirteenth Discourse 

On the contempt of this world 
The story of the Haji and the Sufi ... 

Fourteenth Discourse 

On the reproach of negligence 
The story of the tyrannical king and the truthful 
man 

Fifteenth Discourse 

On the reproach of the envious 

The story of the young prince and his old enemies 

Sixteenth Discourse 

On travelling swiftly 

The story of the wounded child 

Seventeenth Discourse 
On devotion and solitude ... 

The story of a sage and his disciples 


PAGE 

185 

189 


189 

193 


194 

198 


199 

202 


204 

206 


209 

211 


214 

217 


219 

222 


223 

227 


228 

231 







XVI 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Eighteenth Discourse 

On the contempt of hypocrites . 

The story of Jamshid and his household ... 

Nineteenth Discourse 

On welcoming the next world 

The story of Harunor Eashid and the barber 

Twentieth Discourse 
On the shamelessness of the people 
The story of the nightingale and the falcon 

On the ending of the book ... 

Index . 


233 

235 


239 

243 


245 

248 

249 
253 


Frontispiece : The old woman and Sanjar (see p. 167) 
(from an old Persian miniature, by permission of Chester Beatty, Esq.). 


Table I. The Great Saljuqs and the Saljuqs of 
Firak, Kordestan, and Azarbaijan 

Between pp. 77 and 78 


Table II. The Atabeks of Azarbaijan 

Between pp. 77 and 78 











the life and times of nezami 

OF GANJEH 


The biographers have been in the dark as to the date of 
the birth of Nezami, one of the greatest poets of Persia,, 
while as to the date of his death, they differ as much as 
27 year’s. 

He was the son of Yusof, the son of Zaki, the son of 
Mo’aiyad, and was born near Qom in A.D. 1145. His 
mother, Ra’iseh, was the daughter of a Kurdish chieftain, 
and his uncle was Khajeh Hasan, by whom he was 
brought up. 

He emigrated to Ganjeh, where he lived the whole 
of his life in the utmost fame and sanctity, and where 
he died in A.D. 1207. 

He married three wives, two of whom were the 
daughters of kings. By his first wife he had a son, named 
Mohammad. 

He wrote five books, the Five Treasures. He com¬ 
pleted Makhzanol Asrar in A.D. 1184, Khosrou Shirin 
in A.D. 1185, Leili Majnun in A.D. 1192, Haft Peikar 
in A.D. 1197, the first part of the Eskandar Nameh in 
A.D. 1200, and the last part in A.D. 1202. He also- 
wrote a divan, some fragments of which still exist. 
The kings of his time considered it an honour to be 
favoured with his company. He mostly shunned their 
courts, but dedicated his books to them at their request. 

Nezami’s times saw great upheavals in the political 
affairs of Persia, the defeat, capture, and death of Sanjar, 
the consequent disintegration of the Great Saljuq Em¬ 
pire, the rise and fall of the Kharazm Shahs and the 
Atabeks, the fall of the Ghaznavids, the activities of the 
Assassins, and the first signs of the greatest calamity the 
world yet witnessed, namely, the invasion of the Mongols. 

B 







2 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

All Persians and Orientalists who are acquainted with 
the literature of Persia agree that Nezami of Ganjeh, 
as a writer of romantic poetry, is the finest, noblest, most 
-original, and most prolific of the Persian poets of all ages, 

A comparison of his Leili and Majnun with the Yusof 
and Zoleikha of Ferdousi should be a convincing proof of 
the vast superiority of Nezami over Ferdousi as far as 
romantic poetry is concerned, and this in spite of the 
fact that the Leili and Majnun is not one of Nezami’s 
best romantic works. 

In the sphere of epic poetry, he stands next only to 
Ferdousi himself. Even in this sphere, when dealing with 
historical facts, such as the career and conquest of 
Alexander the Great, Nezami often approaches in style 
and grandeur the Shah Nameh of Ferdousi. It is indeed 
■difficult to find in the Shah Nameh of Ferdousi a passage 
more sublime and beautiful, more expressive and melo¬ 
dious than some of those in the Kliosrou Shirin or in the 
Haft Peikar of Nezami. 

As a writer of mystic, just as of romantic poetry, 
he is still unrivalled by any poet of any period. A 
comparison of his Makhzanol Asrar with the Hadiqeh 
of Sana-’i, or the Manteqot Teir of Attar, or the 
Matla’ol Anvar of Amir Khosrou of Delhi, or the 
Tohfatol Ahrar of Jami, will convince us of the greatly 
superior force, purity, melody, and beauty of language, 
and spiritual conviction of the first over the others. 

Every line of his Treasury of Mysteries is a living 
witness to his absolute certainty that piety, devotion, 
humility, and self-forgetfulness are the four corner stones 
■of total annihilation, which in turn is necessary for uni¬ 
fication with God and the foundation of the edifice of 
■eternal life. 

Indeed Jami, in his Nafahatol Ons, justly remarks : 
“ Although most of Nezami’s works on the surface 
appear to be romance, in reality they are a mask for 
■essential truths and for the explanation of divine 
knowledge.” 







THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 3 

He combined piety and ascetism and universality of 
genius with a feeling of tolerance, and at times even 
respect for the beliefs of others. He was a rigid Sunni,, 
yet not once in his works has he attacked the Shi’as or 
any other sect or religion. He was conscious of his own 
greatness, yet he bore the burden of his poverty with 
independence and resignation. He repaid the malice of 
his enemies, as he had no rival, with loving advice and 
tender feelings. 

He was frequently requested by kings and ruling 
princes of his time to immortalize their names in his 
books. His loving nature and the dictates of circum¬ 
stances, not gain, made him lavish praises on the kings 
who had desired to be mentioned. 

Hafez compares his own poetry with that of Nezami, 
and says: 

‘ ‘ 0 Hafez ! Thy poetry is full of lustre like a string 
of perfect pearls, 

Which, at the time of rapture and ecstasy, surpasses 
Nezami’s rhyme.” 

Faiyazi says as follows : 

“ Do not enquire about the magic of Ganjeh’s 
Treasurer, 

Because his pen was a serpent, protecting the 
hidden treasure of divine secrets. 

If a false prophet could produce verses equal to 
those in the Qor’an, 

It may be then possible to imagine that other poets 
could produce poetry equal to that of Nezami.” 

Hashemi of Kerman calls Nezami “ the revealer of 
mystic forms, the unique pearl of the ocean of divine 
benevolence, the kingly jewnl of the sea of existence ”, 
and says that the empire of poetry obtained its laws 
and order from Nezami’s beautiful verses. “ To present 
words before Nezami’s silent speech,” he says, ‘‘is waste 
of time.” 









4 


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


It will be unnecessary to quote more verses of other 
poets written in praise of Nezami, because this would be 
an endless task. Among the many notable poets who 
have taken the Five Treasures of Nezami as their model 
may be mentioned Amir Khosrou of Delhi, Khaju of 
Herman, Jami, and Hatefi. Besides these, scores of poets 
have imitated the Makhzanol Asrar and many scores of 
poets have started their masnavi with the first line of 
the Makhzanol Asrar. To take a poet as his model, or 
to begin his work with the first line of the poetry of the 
master, is the greatest tribute a poet of Persia can give 
to him. There is no other poet in Persia whose works 
have been taken as a model nearly as much as the w T orks 
of Nezami, in spite of his being a Sunni and the Persians 
Shi’as. Moreover, it is necessary to add that Nezami is 
the first Persian poet w'ho broke away from the customary 
form of the panegyric and invented the new form of the 
masnavi, which has remained a perfect model up to the 
present day. 

Arefi in his Hal Nameh prays to “ Love ” as follows : 

“ Oh, Love, look upon my condition 

And reveal to me the mystery of Truth, 

In order that like a ball my soul may rise 

And lift my head to the bliss of ecstasy, 

In order that I may be precious in the eyes of the 
world, 

Like the jewels of Nezami’s rhymes.” 

Mirza Fath Ali Khan in his Shahanshah Nameh says : 

“ Nezami, who in Persian eloquence 

Gan well claim kingship, 

Brought his troubles to an end at the time of 
Bahram; 

In his name he created Five Treasures.” 

Qasemi in his Shah Nameh associated his own work 
with that of Nezami in the following strain : 




THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 5 

* ‘ i W ould open the door of the Treasury of Mysteries 
(Makhzanol Asrar) 

And would display the light from the path of the 
rising sun. 

I would relate the romance of Leili and Majnun 

And would fill the world with hidden pearls. 

I would sing the beauties of Shirin and Khosrou 

And would open the door of reality to the world.” 

Though all the poets and biographers are of one accord 
in their praises of Nezami, they are equally wanting in 
any useful biographical facts and dates concerning him. 

From amongst the biographers Haji Lotf Ali Beig 
in his Atash Kadeh says that Nezami’s full name is Abu 
Mohammad Elyas, son of Yusof, son of Mo’aiyad. His 
father was from Tafresh, a dependency of Qom. He 
went to Ganjeh, where Nezami was born. He was a 
pupil of Akhi Faraj. His good qualities, he says, are 
beyond count, and as a poet he is above praise, and from 
the beginning of his life to the end he did not court, for 
worldly gain, the favours of the kings and nobles like 
other poets. But on the contrary, his threshold was the 
sanctuary of the great kings. 

He also incidentally mentions the visit of Alp Arsalan 
to Nezami’s monastery, and says that after the poet’s 
death, which took place in A.H. 586, his five books were 
collected and were called the Khamseh, and each of 
them was written at the request of a reigning monarch. 
He also says that Nezami is buried at Ganjeh and his grave 
is a place of pilgrimage. We are also told that besides 
the Khamseh he has written 20,000 couplets or pane¬ 
gyrics, odes, quatrains and qata’at which are no longer 
extant. But he writes 62 couplets which he says he has 
seen and selected from different memoirs. 

Jami in the Nafahatol Ons says that Nezami wrote 
his last book, the Eskandar Nameh, in A.H. 592 (A.D. 
1196) and at that time he was over 60 years of age. In 
his Baharestan he only mentions that Nezami’s excellence 
is more manifest than the sun and has no need of descrip- 




6 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

tion. But he quotes one of his odes, showing that besides 
his Khamseh, Nezami has also written a divan of odes. 

It would be vain to try to enumerate all the leading 
features and characteristics of Nezami’s poetry, or to 
tell in how many respects he excels all other poets. 

He was most learned and his works show how well 
he knew the arts and sciences of his time. He has pre¬ 
sented to us an intellectual banquet as rich as it is 
picturesque. His whole work is embellished with graceful 
tastes and the vivid lights of a varied imagination. In 
his touches of the tenderest pathos, his outbursts of 
eloquence, grace and beauty, in simplicity of style, and 
in the melody of his poetry he is without a rival. The 
grandeur of his lofty and dignified language is quite in 
keeping with the sublimity of his themes. Every line of 
his Khamseh displays his power of eloquence, gorgeous, 
majestic imagery, and melodious musical versification. 

In his sorrows he is natural, gentle, calm, dig nif ied, 
and eloquent. In short, he always awakens our best 
feelings. 

Of his works the most beautiful are Makhzanol Asrar, 
Khosrou Shirin, and Haft Peikar. As the subject matter 
of the Khamseh has been explained by many scholars, 
I need not detain the reader with it. 

Notwithstanding that Nezami is the master of mystic 
poetry and the lord and creator of romantic poetry to a 
degree never approached by any poet before or since his 
time, and although he is only second to Eerdousi himself 
in epic poetry, yet we have hardly any information as to 
his life. 

The following show's the confusion of the biographers 
even as regards the date of the death of Nezami : Doulat 
Shah says that Nezami died in A.H. 576 ; the At ash Kadeh 
says A.H. 586 ; the Jahan Ara gives A.H. 597 ; Haji Khali- 
feli mentions A.H. 596 ; the Sobh-e Sadeq gives A.H. 602, 
and Taqi Kashi mentions A.H. 606, a discrepancy of 
30 years. There being so little reliable information left 










THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


7 


to us concerning the life of Nezami, it is necessary to get 
this information from his own works. 

Let us consider the following passages from the 
Makhzanol Asrar, the first of his Five Treasures. The 
quotations are taken from the Teheran lithographed 
edition of A.H. 1316 (A.D. 1898) of the Five Treasures, 
and the references to pages and lines belong to that 
edition. I have compared this edition with the India 
Office MS. 402, dated A.D. 1488, and the British Museum 
MS. Add. 7729, dated A.D. 1400, which are the oldest 
MSS. in this country. I will indicate the fact whenever 
I find a different reading between the Teheran edition 
and these manuscripts. 

MATERIAL FROM MAKHZANOL ASRAR 
P.9, 1. 15. 

“ Thou art the guide, why is the caravan alone? 

Thou hast the centre of the army, why is the banner 
here ? 

From one side they attack the religion; 

From other sides they ambush. 

Either send an Ali to the line of the battle-field, 

Or send an Omar to the gate of Satan. 

Five hundred and eighty years (A.D. 1184-85) is 
enough to sleep; 

The day is getting on, make haste to the assembly.” 

This shows that Nezami is not satisfied with the 
religious behaviour of the people and invokes the return 
of Mohammad to come and protect the Faith which is 
assailed from all directions. It also, together with other 
quotations which will follow, proves that he was a Sunni. 
The date 580 after the death of Mohammad (A.D. 1184- 
85) is of the utmost importance in our search for the birth, 
the times, and the death of Nezami. This same date is 
given in the British Museum MS. Add. 7729. fol. 4b. 
line 13, second couplet, and also in the India Office MS. 
402. I am convinced, however, that the 580 must mean 







1 


8 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

580 after the Hejrat, not after the death of the Prophet. 
The Makhzanol Asrar is dedicated to Fakhrod-Din Bah¬ 
rain Shah, son of Davud, who is described as King of 
Armenia and Rum. This Bahram Shah was the here¬ 
ditary ruler of the principality of Arzanjan and reigned 
from A.H. 578 until his death in A.H. 622, therefore 
the Teheran edition, the India Office MS. 402 and the 
British Museum MS. Or. 1216, together with scores of 
biographers, Persian and non-Persian, cannot be correct 
in giving the date of the completion of Makhzanol Asrar 
as A.H. 559. 

The following will be the second quotation : 

P. 10, 1. 20. 

“ I who, in the circle of this universe, 

Like the pivot of the compass, became a prisoner 
in the city, 

Have no ability to go forth; 

I have the shadow, but not the glory of the 
Phoenix. 

My foot has stuck in this dust; 

I am holding to the cord of fortune. 

I have bowed down my head to my feet 
And stepped on my bended knee. 

When the mind’s eye, with sound judgment 
Searched quickly round the world, 

I saw from my soul’s high position 

The bestower of dignity, the lord of favours, 

The king of heaven’s crown, possessing Solomon’s 
signet, 

The pride of skies, the King Fakhrod-Din. 

His lineage goes straight to David, 

For his nobility the name of Solomon is befitting. 












THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJ EH 


9 


The banner of Isaac is raised by him; 

If he has an enemy, it is an Esma’ili. 

He possesses one heart, six directions, and seven 
courts, 

The centre of nine circles, Bahrain Shah; 

Teach the ear of morning the lessons of polite 
knowledge; 

Kindle with happiness the candle of eloquence. 

Send the world’s robe of honour to a servant; 

Send a perfume of acceptance to Nezami. 

This sea and mine (of knowledge) is without pearl 
and ruby; 

Give him pearls from the hand and rubies from 
the mouth.” 

P. 12, 1. 3. 

‘‘ I who am the singer of this fresh rose 

For thy garden, am a nightingale of rare melody. 

I have not accepted favours from any one; 

Whatsoever my heart has bid me to say, I have 
said.” 

This passage shows that the poet is living in the city 
and complains of his inability to go out, and that by his 
own elfort he tries to improve the state of his affairs. 

His mind wanders through the world to find a helper. 
He dedicates his book to the King Fakhrod-Din. This 
is the only passage in the whole of Nezami’s work where 
he very mildly attacks the belief of others by saying that 
the only enemy the king could have is an Esma’ili. In 
order to commemorate a king’s name in his book, the 
poet was obliged, according to custom, to ask favours 
from the king, so he asks the king for a robe of honour, 
pearls and rubies. But to show that he is not lavishing 
praise on the king for the sake of gain, he says that 







10 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

his heart has compelled him to say what he writes and 
not the thought of gain, as he had not received from other 
kings anything not belonging to himself. 

On page 12, beginning at line 6, he gives a detailed 
description of how and why he dedicates his Makhzanol 
Asrar to the then ruling prince, Bahram Shah. He starts 
by saying that for a few mornings he had pondered 
over wisdom and learning. As a result of this meditation 
he had produced a magic curtain, meaning the Treasury 
of Mysteries. He justly claims that his Makhzanol Asrar 
contains both royal dignity and the religious life of 
poverty. He further asserts that its sweetness is not 
contaminated by any flies, nor does it spoil the sweetness 
of others, meaning that no other poet has imitated it, 
nor has he borrowed from or imitated any other poet. 
As he himself mentions, he has drawn by lot the names 
of kings and found Bahram Shah the fortunate winner 
and dedicates his book to him in consequence. He also 
refers to another book written by another poet, and 
dedicated to another Bahram Shah ruling in Ghaznin. 
This other book is evidently the Hadiqeh of Sana’i. 

He praises Sana’i’s work, but justly considers his own 
superior. He again tells the king that no one has read 
his book and advises him to read it, saying that, if it 
possesses beauty and divine knowledge, he should study it, 
and if it does not, he should forget it. In the following 
line he says the king has proved faithful to him and for 
that reason he is devoted to him, and although many 
eulogists and praisers are at the court of the king, yet 
they all bow before Nezami. We understand in the same 
passage that Nezami used to frequent the king’s court, 
but he really wished to remain more or less in seclusion 
and spend his life in religious devotions. He brings a 
subtle excuse for not attending the king’s court by saying 
he is surrounded by people and not able to emerge, 
evidently meaning that his family requirements and 
private life prevented him from attending the king’s 










THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 11 

court in person. His other excuse is that the king’s 
presence is very exalted, and that the king is protected 
by lions and brave warriors who make the approach to 
his court very difficult. 

He praises the king with a loud voice, so that the 
king may hear him, meaning that he is dedicating and 
sending his Makhzanol Asrar to the king, Bahrain Shah, 
Faklirod Din, the son of Davud. 

On page 14, beginning with line 17, we are given a 
clear vision of Nezami’s high rank as a poet and of his 
reputation, which had spread in every direction even 
in his own lifetime. Nezami, moreover, fully realizes 
his own poetic talent and genius. I cannot do better 
than quote the following three lines, the reference to 
which was given above. 

The temple of poetry was built through me; 

Poetical talent obtained glory bv me. 

The hermit and the monk rushed towards me 

And threw off the beggar’s clothes and belt. 

Whoever exists, may he be young or old, 

Becomes bewitched by my magic words.” 

On page 15, line 12, we have an important reference 
to the age of the poet, the significance of which will be 
shown, when we deal with the exact time of his 
life when he was writing his third book, the Leili and 
Majnun. On this page he says that his poetical works 
are the result of forty years of blending genius and 
intellect. At forty years of age the intellect is matured, 
and her requirements on her journey through the world 
are increased. 

Then he addresses himself and says : 

Thou requirest a friend now, do not resort to magic 
spells ; 

Do not study now, what thou shouldst have learned 
in forty years.” 









12 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEIl 

Evidently the poet, when writing this passage, was 
about, if not exactly, forty years old. Previously we 
had the reference calling upon Mohammad to awake 
from a sleep of 580 years and protect his faith. This 
580 must be after the Hejrat and not after the death 
of Mohammad, which occurred 11 years after the Hejrat. 
It is a peculiarly Persian mode of expression in similar 
circumstances to call upon the Prophet to awake after 
a long sleep and to quote the date of the Hejrat. They 
say Noah was a, prophet for 900 years, although they 
realise that Noah could not have been a prophet from 
his birth until his death. We can take the poet’s words 
as definitely meaning he was 40 years of age, and if the 
Makhzanol Asrar was written in A.H. 580 (A.D. 1184) 
and the poet was 40 years of age at that time, he must 
have been born in A.H. 540 (A.D. 1145-46). The poet 
could easily have given any of the following dates, if he 
wished, without destroying the metre : 570, 560, 550, etc. 
Only in the date 560 he would have had to increase the 
word “sal” after the date and still be correct in his 
metre. It is interesting to note that the Calcutta litho¬ 
graphed edition gives the date A.H. 570 (A.D. 1174) to 
this line. These tvra different readings still help to prove 
that the poet was born in A.D. 1145-46, because if we 
suppose Nezami called upon the Prophet to awake after 
a sleep of 570 years, then the date of his sleep must be 
taken to mean the date of his death, i.e. A.H. 11 (A.D. 
632). But on the other hand, if we suppose the poet 
said, “ awake after a sleep of 580 years,” this 580 years 
must be taken to mean 580 years after the Hejrat. The 
difference of one year is thus produced. This difference 
disappears if we suppose the line was written either near 
the beginning of the year 570 after the death of the 
Prophet, or near the end of the year 580 after the 
Hejrat. 

It is also possible, and I think most probable, that the 
poet himself is responsible for these two apparently dif- 









THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


13 


ferent dates. Possibly in his first manuscript he wrote 
580 years and he thought of the Hejrat. In his next copy 
he wrote 570 to coincide actually with 570 after the death 
of the Prophet. This conjecture would become a certainty, 
if we could find an old manuscript giving 570 as the 
number of years of the Prophet’s sleep. So far, both the 
British Museum MS. Add. 7729, and the India Office 
MS. 402 give the date 580 years after the sleep of the 
Prophet. This, as shown previously, must be taken to 
mean A.H. 580 and not after the Prophet’s death, which 
occurred in A.H. 11. 

Another important consideration in fixing the 
date of the birth of the poet and the composition of 
the Makhzanol Asrar is his death. His last book, the 
Eskandar Xarneh, was completed in A.H. 599 (A.D. 
1202-03) (see the British Museum MS. Add. 16,782, 
fol. 117, and the Calcutta lithographed edition, p. 182). 
In A.H. 599 (A.D. 1202-03), i.e. when he completed 
the second part of the Eskandar Xarneh, he was 60 years 
old (see the British Museum MS. Add. 25,900, fol. 319a, 
the India Office MS. 402, fol. 722a, 1. 12, the British 
Museum MS. Add. 7729, fol. 315a,, and the Teheran 
lithographed edition, page 644). He died soon after the 
completion of the second book of the Eskandar Xarneh 
at the age of 631 years (see the British Museum MSS. 
Add. 7729, fol. 313b, Add. 25,900, fol. 317b, and the 
Teheran edition, page 642). This must have been 
in the middle of A.H. 604 (A.D. 1207-8), and since 
he was 63J years old at his death and he died in the 
middle of A.H. 604 (A.D. 1207-8) he must have been 
born A.H. 540 (A.D. 1145-46). This coincides with our 
important discovery of his bidding the Prophet awake 
after a sleep of 580 years at the time when the poet was 
40 years old, and when 580 meant after the Hejrat. 

Briefly then, Xezami was born in A.H. 540 (A.D. 
1145-46), completed Makhzanol Asrar in A.H. 580 
(A.H. 1184), and died in the middle of A.H. 604 (A.D. 
1207-8). 






14 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

The Makhzanol Asrar, the most beautiful mystic 
poem in the Persian language, has both perfection of 
language and grandeur of thought. It is undoubtedly 
the product of a matured mind and the highest standard 
of intellect, and it is inconceivable that any human being 
could have attained this degree of development and 
matured thought at an age younger than 40 years. The 
date given for the completion of the Makhzanol Asrar 
in the Teheran lithographed edition, the British Museum 
MS. Or. 1216, fol. 31, and the India Office MS, 
402, is A.H. 559 (A.D. 1163-64). As the poet was born 
in A.H. 540 (A.D. 1145-46), it would mean that he wrote 
the Makhzanol Asrar when he was 19 years old, which 
is absurd. The same absurdity is apparent in the Haft 
Asman of Agha Ahmad Ali and in Haji Khali fell in giving 
the date A.H. 559 (A.D. 1163-64) for the completion of 
the Makhzanol Asrar. The British Museum MS. Add. 
19,500 (last page) gives the completion of the Makhzanol 
Asrar as A.H. 582 (A.D. 1186), which is nearer to the 
truth than any other copies I have seen. 

Dr. Kieu is therefore wrong, in the British Museum 
Catalogue, Persian Manuscripts, Vol. II, p. 565, in giving 
the death of Nezami as A.H. 598 or A.H. 599. He is, 
however, right in saying that Nezami lived for sixty 
three and a half years, but he wrongly reckons from 
A.H. 535 (A.D. 1140-41) as the date of his birth. 

The Sobh-e Sadeq seems to be nearer to the truth 
than any other biography in giving the date A.H. 602 
as the date of the poet’s death. Nezami's birthplace is 
Qohestan, in the district of Qom, as he refers to this fact 
in his Eskander Nam eh, page 574 of the Teheran edition. 
There he says : “ Although I am lost as a pearl in the 
sea of Ganjeh, yet I am from the Qohestan of the city 
of Qom.” This Qohestan is probably the moun¬ 
tainous district of Qom. We have no authoritative 
evidence in the works of the poet himself to substantiate 











THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


15 


Haji Lotf Ali Beig’s assertion in his Atash Kadeh that 
Nezami’s father was from Tafresh, and that his father 
went to Ganjeh, where Nezami was born. It is, however, 
in accordance with Nezami’s saying to suppose that he 
was bom near Qom. As mentioned by Nezami on page 
16, line 10, he lived a life of retirement and poverty, yet 
contentment. He was sensitive to the ridicule of his 
enemies and seems to have suffered at their hands. He 
says on page 49, beginning with line 9, that “ the dust 
of the earth is not clean except by virtue, and virtue is 
not found in this earth to-day. If virtue lifts up her 
head, vice will lay hands on her. They wall worry the 
skilled man, until they destroy his art.” Evidently his 
enemies, ivho were not so gifted in the art of poetry as 
Nezami was, were troublesome to him. They even 
associated his asceticism and meditation with insanity. 
He complains that his enemies cannot see virtue or find 
anything except faults and shortcomings. But he bore 
their attacks and sneers with a noble endurance and 
philosophical mind. Indeed, he compares them with a 
blind man who could not see the Tigris, or with an ant 
carrying with great difficulty a wing of a, locust. His 
enemies are only two or three in number, but he does 
not mention their names. 

On page 50, line 10, we find him in a different mood ; 
here he mentions that he has written Makhzanol Asrar 
as a result of a few nights’ meditation. He realizes that 
poverty has compelled him to remain in Ganjeh, although 
everywhere outside Ganjeli they would receive him with 
open arms. He seems not to have received anything 
except acclamation and applause from his admirers. He 
realizes that, if he went to Erak, he would be favourably 
received by everyone. We do not know, however, the 
exact reason of his being unable to leave Ganjeli; surely 
poverty could not be the only reason, because, no matter 
how poor he may have been, he could certainly have left 
Ganjeh, as that could not have meant a great expense. 








16 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

I believe that he was compelled to remain in Ganjeh for 
some reason unknown at present, and I doubt if it ever 
will be known. He continually refers to his being im¬ 
prisoned in Ganjeh and forbidden to go out; he never 
mentions the cause. His great sanctity would have pre¬ 
vented his being imprisoned in Ganjeh. In the conclusion 
of Makhzanol Asrar he says, he lowered his head and 
from his lips he scattered pearls, and brought the Treasury 
of Mysteries to completion. He gives^ thanks to God that 
he has finished the Makhzanol Asrar, and further, he 
tells us the important fact that most of his life has come 

to an end. . 

The India Office MS. 402 and the British Museum 
copy Or. 1216, folio 31, have two couplets which are not 
found in the Teheran edition. These give the date of 
the completion of Makhzanol Asrar as 24th Babi , 
A H. 559 (Feb. 20,1164). These dates cannot be correct, 
as it would make Nezami 19 years old on the completion 
of Makhzanol Asrar, or it would give the duration of 
his life as 84i yea rs, which, as shown previously, cannot 
be right. The other British Museum copy, Add. 19,500, 
gives A.H. 582 as the date of the completion of Makh¬ 
zanol Asrar, which is only out by two years. 

Another fact which we have as a guide is that 
Nezami’s son, as we find on page 192, line 25, in the 
Ehosrou Shirin, the second book of Nezami, was seven 
years old when the poet wrote that book. It will bo 
shown that he completed the Ehosrou Shinn in A.H. 581, 
therefore at the completion of Makhzanol Asrar his son 
must have been six years old. As Nezami often re ers 
to his poverty, and we find later on that he was brough 
up by his uncle, Ehajeh Hasan, it is not likely that he 
could have married at the age of 13 years or less. 

MATERIAL ER-OM EHOSROU SHIRIN 

On page 56, line 24, again we find Nezami a rigid 
Sunni. He mentions that the Prophet gave the temple 








the life and times of nezami of ganjeh 17 

of his laws four cardinal directions and founded four 
eternal walls for it, meaning, of course, the first four 
Caliphs. On page 57, line 3, he mentions that the four 
friends of the Prophet give out the five prayers in the 
royal procession of Mohammad, the Prophet. 

On page 64, beginning at line 15, we are given an 
interesting incident in the life of Nezami. He had shut 
himself up from the world, and his only occupations were 
prayer and devotion. After prayers he used occasionally 
to spend his time in the study of astronomy. He had 
only one pious and godly friend w T ho was allowed to 
frequent his society. This friend was a helper and 
protector and sympathiser of Nezami, although he also 
used to live in retirement and seclusion. One night, while 
Nezami was in deep meditation, he entered and began 
to reproach and rebuke Nezami severely, saying : “ Thou 
art supposed to be the lord of spiritual understanding 
and the king of eloquence and speech. Thou hast been 
deceived by the deceit of the idolators and fire-wor¬ 
shippers. Thou hast revived the fables of the Zoroastrians. 
Sing the song of the Unity of God ; why art thou reviving 
the customs of the Magians? Although the fire-wor¬ 
shippers consider thy heart alive, yet the true believers 
consider it dead.” The poet was not embittered by these 
reproaches and began to read a few passages from the 
love stories of the beautiful Shirin. When his friend 
heard these ravishing stories, he remained silent, as 
though he had lost his speech. Nezami said : “ Why art 
thou silent now, and how is it thou canst not find words 
for praise? ” The friend surrendered himself to Nezami 
with the utmost humiliation and asked him to complete 
his story and finish the building, the foundation of which 
he had laid so beautifully. Then the poet calls on him¬ 
self to leave the prison city of Ganjeh, to attack like a 
lion, to spread his shadow like a phoenix, and to relinquish 
the country to a few owls. He seems to have a few bitter 
enemies who are jealous of his fame and virtue. He 









18 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

knows that if he leaves the country he will not hear even 
the names of his enemies after two stages. He compares 
those enemies with candles which are at the same time 
moths, taking pleasure in their own scanty lights in their 
own homes. 

This interesting incident in the life of the poet must 
have occurred soon after the commencement of the Khosrou 
Shirin, and he must have roused the censure and wrath 
of the fanatical Sunnis of the city. It also shows the 
deep love and attachment which united the poet with 
his country and her glorious past. Although he himself 
was a Sunni, in his heart he could not find a more sublime 
and majestic theme to harmonise with his lofty imagi¬ 
nation and power of description. 

On page 57, line 15, we find interesting aspects of 
his life. He tells us that fortune approached him. A 
messenger came from King Toghrel, the son of Arsalan, 
asking him to ‘ paint a new image for the w T orld,’ 
because the world was without any entrancing stories. 

The royal message was that he should teach the spirit 
as Jesus did, and to kindle the candle of love like Moses. 

He promised the poet that he would liberally reward 
him for his toil and would not treat him as Ferdousi was 
treated by Mahmud. He told him that if he broke his 
promise, Nezami could satirize him in the same way as 
Ferdousi satirized Mahmud. Then Nezami has a soliloquy 
with his heart. He says to himself that the successful 
poets obtained their fame through the kings. They were 
not poverty stricken and had no worries about their daily 
sustenance ; their minds "were free to exercise their full 
force on the production of poetry. “ But I have turned 
my face away from the world and have to subsist on and 
content myself with a small piece of barley bread.” 
He likens himself to a serpent sleeping on the top of a 
treasure, and to a treasure which has shut itself out 
from the eyes of the world. He then addresses the king 
in his mind and tells him that he only requires encourage¬ 
ment from the king and nothing else, and that although 






THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 19 

he possesses no wealth, yet he possesses the blessing of 
contentment, which is more than enough for him. 

Further on, on page 58, we find that when the 
mesenger of Toglirel came to him, he was already con¬ 
templating the subject matter of Khosrou Shirin, and that 
he was already engaged in laying the foundation of this 
edifice. He accepted Toghrel’s offer and, as he tells us, 
he completed the work in a short time, but delayed in 
sending it to the court on account of “ the king’s en¬ 
gagements ”. 

Then he sends his book to the court, dedicated to 
Toghrel, and says : “If the book gives any pleasure to 
the king, lie may reward me for it.” He also addresses 
himself to the Atabek, Abu Ja’far Mohammad, who was 
the son of Atabek Ildegez, the Viceroy of Toghrel, and 
says : “ The time has come when the Atabek should 
look upon Nezami with favour. The Atabek should ask 
himself how much longer should such an eloquent person 
remain in seclusion and such a master of speech remain 
unprovided for. Let the Atabek also remind himself 
that this melodious singing bird has been singing his 
praise and giving thanks for his favours during a lifetime 
without having received any favours.” We do not find 
any reference to Nezami having received any rewards 
from either Toghrel or the Atabek. As a matter of fact 
it is evident, as we shall shortly see, that he never received 
any recompense for his trouble from either of them; 
yet he was not embittered against them, and bestowed 
his requested praises with a mind more generous and a 
resignation more noble than could be found in any poet 
of any period in Persia. The excuse that the Atabek 
gave for not rewarding the poet was that Nezami should 
frequent his court and give up his life of retirement. 
Evidently Nezami had heard the Atabek’s objection, 
and, as found on page 56, line 2, he answers, saying : 
“ With regard to what thou complainest of, that I am not 
always attending thy court, let it not be hidden from 








20 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

thee that my companions are prayers, and not men; I 
who have chosen a life of retirement, am made of vinegar 
and honey; half of my temperament has opened the 
spring of life, the other half, composed of piety, compels 
me to carry my burden upon my own shoulder.” He 
says he is like musk and has obtained his perfume of 
piety through retirement and seclusion, and, like the 
phoenix, he has accustomed himself to loneliness. He 
excuses himself from the company of the king in saying 
that the rose of the king’s banquet should not be 
spoiled by such a thorn as himself, and that he is 
unable to discharge any service except prayers. He states 
that he is not well versed in service required by the king’s 
courtiers, and that he is happier when alone. This shows 
to what an extent the kings of his time coveted his 
company, and how the poet avoided an easy and luxurious 
life and contented himself with his own scanty provision. 

He prefers his life of piety and seclusion for the 
purpose of meditation and prayers to the glory which 
the king could bestow upon him. 

On page 63, line 14, we are told the reason which 
compelled him to w T rite the romance of Khosrou Shirin. 
He says : 

“ As I have a treasure like Makhzanol Asrar, 

Why should I trouble about romances? 

But there is no one in the world to-day 
Who has no desire for romance and fables.” 

This is a decisive proof that the Makhzanol Asrar 
was written before the Kliosrou Shirin. We must also 
remember that the Atabek Mohammad who is men¬ 
tioned by Nezami, died in A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), there¬ 
fore the poet must have started the composition of 
Khosrou Shirin and completed it before A.H. 581 (A.D. 
1185). As we will find later, he dedicated the Khosrou 
Shirin afterward to Qezel Arsalan who succeeded his 
brother, the Atabek Mohammad, as a young man. This 








THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 21 

Qezel Arsalan was murdered in his sleep five years later. 
We also have in Khosrou Shirin a eulogy on his nephew 
and successor, the Atabek, Nosratod-Din Abu Bakr, the 
son of Mohammad, which was written after the murder 
of his uncle. 

The poet tells us that the story of Khosrou and Shirin 
is well known, that it is enthralling, and that there is 
no sweeter love story than this. He admits fairly and 
justly that he has learned this story from the old history 
books of his country, specially alluding to Ferdousi. 
Incidentally he has painted for us a true picture of some 
of the ancient monuments of Persia which, as he says, 
existed during his own time, and of which the ravages 
of time have robbed us. During his time the Bisotun, 
the engraving of Shabdiz, the horse of Parviz, his palace, 
the engineering works of Farhad, the channel of the 
stream of Shirin, the remains of her palace, the Khosrou’s 
palace and his hunting grounds, were still existing. 

On page 192, line 15, we find him as a great astro¬ 
nomer. W 7 ith the astrolabe of knowledge he has solved 
all the difficulties of the skies. Every one who asked 
him questions concerning the condition of the skies has 
received satisfactory answers from him. In a few lines 
he explains how the universe was brought into being. 

‘ ‘ There is first the point; the point moves along and creates 
a line, that is the first divine motion. The point moves 
perpendicularly on this line, and from this second move¬ 
ment surface is evolved. The surface revolves round its 
axis and space is created.” He considers the creation 
from beginning to end in this manner. This shows how 
fruitfully, besides composing his works of art, he has spent 
his time in the study of the sciences of mathematics and 
astronomy. 

It is interesting to note that the science of astronomy 
was one of the important, if not necessary, accomplish¬ 
ments of a poet. A knowledge of astronomy and judicial 
astrology was of special advantage to a court poet who 






22 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

would improve Iris position and prestige, if he could pre¬ 
dict an event or decide for the king upon an appropriate 
and auspicious time for a certain action. Anvari, who 
was one of Nezami’s contemporaries, besides being the 
court poet of Sanjar, was a great astrologer also. He 
ventured on a forecast winch proved disastrous to 
himself. 

According to Tazkeratosh Sho’ara of Doulat Shah, 
it happened that in A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185) the seven 
planets were at one time in the sign of Libra. The 
astronomers predicted gales of such severity during 
that year as would destroy all the buildings and even 
uproot the mountains. In this forecast Anvari was more 
insistent in his warnings than all the other astronomers. 
The people, to protect their lives and property, dug cellars 
to take refuge from the impending calamity. They took 
their belongings into those cellars and lived under the 
earth, and it seemed as though there was no habitation 
on the earth’s surface. But it happened that those 
predicted days were so calm and there was so little wind 
during the whole of that time that the villagers could 
not winnow their harvest. The Tazkeratosh Sho’ara adds 
that though the destructive gale did not arise, yet in the 
•same year Changiz Khan became a chieftain over his 
tribe in Turan and in a short time became an independent 
ruler. Consequently he invaded Persia, and his ravages 
were carried to such an extent that most of the countries 
of Turkestan, Transoxiana and Khorasan became un¬ 
inhabited. 

On page 63, line 3, we find him a great sage and 
moralist. He tells us that the more one knows the less 
one should speak; that we should not say a hundred 
things for every one we know, but say one thing for every 
hundred. If one wants words to have any effect, one 
must say little ; the more one talks the more one is liable 
to censure and correction. “ Speech,” he says, ‘‘is a pearl 
and the speaker a diver. Pure pearls can be obtained 







THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 23 

with great difficulty only. Those who know best the 
value of a perfect pearl will guard it jealously.” 

He advises us to behave in the world in such a manner 
that we should be immune from censure, no matter 
whether we are drunk or sober. He asks us not to spend 
one moment of our life in negligence and not to harm 
anyone or hurt the feelings of others. There is no in¬ 
stance recorded of any of his contemporaries attacking 
Nezami’s moral character or mode of life. Nothing but 
praise has come down to us. Even when he is embittered 
against his enemies, he never mentions their names. We 
hear his complaints but no abuse or retaliation. He 
lived an unblemished life of purity, piety, and self- 
sacrifice. 

On page 205, line 5, we find him satisfied with 
poverty. He knows that if, after a hundred years, people 
asked, where is Nezami, every couplet of his would raise 
its voice, saying, “ Here I am.” He gives a vivid 
description of his life and tells us how he spends his 
time at nights. No night does he go to sleep without 
obtaining a new pearl from the treasure of divine 
wisdom. He compares himself to a miner, mining for 
jew T els at night, and tells us not only to look upon his 
jewels but also upon his toils. He even describes the 
manner in which he tossed about in bed in order to pro¬ 
duce or paint another picture. He deprived himself of 
rest and pleasure to give others ease and delight. He 
complains how, after untold privations and toil, he 
produced his work and sent it to the king, and received 
in return a handful of barley. He invokes the help of 
God to protect him and grant him patience, lest he should 
say a word contrary to his ideals and principles of life. 
He has a certainty and assurance of God’s protection, 
and considers his asceticism to be a golden armour against 
all onslaughts. Many of his enemies attack him, but 
they harm themselves. They are his enemies, only 
because they cannot produce poetry as good as his. They 
are jealous of him, steal his poetry, pretending it to be 








24 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

their own. But he does not mind it; he rains his love 
and blessings on all, friends and foes alike. His teaching 
curiously resembles the ethics and standards of both 
Christian and Mohammadan saints. 

On page 205, line 20, we find his complaints more 
outspoken. He finds himself obliged to imitate the 
sonorous and dreary tunes of others, to praise the un¬ 
worthy, to make an eagle of a sparrow. He does not hope 
to find anything else except “ vacant eyes from the 
crow ”. He gets but poison from the snake. With one 
ear he hears bitter words, whilst on the other ear he 
keeps the ring of servitude. With great patience and 
tolerance he manages to live. He says that any light 
coming from other countries is tenderly attended to, but 
if a candle of ambergris should be lighted in Ganjeh, they 
all rush to put it out. He was obliged to receive poison 
in exchange for his noble and beautiful thoughts. From 
his lap he has scattered pearls, and receives stones of 
ridicvde. In short, he says : “ By my tongue the 
mouths of the people are sweetened, but my mouth 
is bitter with a deadly poison.” His complaints are 
justified; he is asked by kings and ruling princes to 
immortalize their names; he feels they are not worthy of 
praise, yet he must bestow upon them with a lavish hand. 
Instead of any recompense or reward, he receives abuse. 
He knows the great dignity and wealth of other poets 
inferior to him, working for other rulers in other parts 
of Persia. 

On page 203, line 16, we find Nezami in his saddest 
mood. He has lost his wife, the daughter of the ruler 
of Darband. He was deeply in love with her, and we 
can picture him wailing and lamenting his irreparable 
loss. He describes her as most beautiful, wise and full 
of piety, living with him in perfect love and utmost 
harmony. She died in her youth and left him a son, 
who is seven years old at the death of his mother. 

On page 192, line 23, he addresses his son and tells 
him to think of his position in the world, saying : 








THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


25 


‘ ‘ I brought thee up; God gave the provision. 

May God’s name and not my name guard thee.” 

He advises him to be as happy as he has been pre¬ 
viously himself, and not to sit in the path of the 
accusation of enemies. He tells him to strive hard for 
learning, in order that he may get worldly possessions; 
to omit all which pertains to desire, and to engage in the 
knowledge which is divine, in such a manner that every¬ 
one should say, “ What a wonderful son Nezami has 
brought up.” This is the first time that he has addressed 
his son. We find him a loving father, showering tender¬ 
ness, kindness, and advice upon his son in a spirit of 
friendship and companionship. His desire is that every¬ 
one who sees his son should recognize in him a replica 
of himself in divine wisdom and piety. He wishes to 
dispel from his son the feeling of sadness and create in 
him joy and happiness. He teaches him from childhood 
that, although he has brought him up, yet God is the 
all-provider. He is most anxious that his son should 
not frequent the company of bad associates. He rightly 
stresses the usefulness of committing words to memory, 
even though the boy may not know the meaning yet. 

On page 65, line 14, we find Nezami over forty years 
old. He says that the pleasure and pride of youth have de¬ 
parted, that life’s pleasure extends to forty years, and 
that he is now past it and lost the vigour of his youth. 
This also proves that our previous calculation is correct. 
After the completion of the Khosrou Shirin, for about 
two or three years we do not hear anything about the life 
of the poet. He was disappointed in Toghrel and the 
Atabek Mohammad. The Atabek, Abu Ja’far Moham¬ 
mad, died A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), and his brother, Qezel 
Arsalan, succeeded him. Nezami, being disappointed in 
every direction, writes a eulogy to Qezel Arsalan. He asks 
the morning breeze to kiss the threshold of the king 
w r hen it passes it and to tell the king that, although 






26 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

Nezami has been prevented from attending the king’s 
court, he has not been estranged from the king’s service, 
and now that he has completed his work, he has dedicated 
■it to the king. Evidently, Nezami has been asked 
to dedicate his book to him. He has not been in the 
king’s court for some time, and the excuse he gives 
shows that he lias been engaged in writing the eulogy 
and probably reorganising and extending the romance of 
Khosrou Shirin, one of the apparent extensions is his 
beautiful and sorrowful elegy on the death of his wife. 
She must have died after A.H. 581 (A..D. 1185), as it 
would be inconceivable to imagine that the poet could 
have been capable of painting the beautiful and gorgeous 
scenes of the loves of Ixhosrou and Shirin after his loss. 
The reading of the romance of Khosrou Shirin convinces 
us that it must have been the product of a heart untouched 
by sorrow. 

On page 206, line 11, we find Nezami has not yet 
received any favours for his toil. He has been promised 
great wealth, and none of the promises have been kept. 
He has been given to understand that he would have a 
royal horse with gold and bejewelled trappings; that he 
would have treasure, ten slaves and five handmaidens. 
He does not complain of these broken promises but 
laments the death of the Atabek Mohammad. The reason 
of his poverty is the death of the Atabek, and if he had 
lived long enough, he would amply have repaid his toils. 
Whilst he was in this sorrowful state a messenger entered 
with a letter in his hand. After the exchange of salu¬ 
tations, he sat down by him. He told him that the 
royal train had approached to within a distance of 30 
farsakhs, and that he should make haste and prepare 
him elf for a month’s journey; that he should close the 
door and leave the key behind, because the king wished 
to see him for a few days. He handed the letter to 
Nezami, saying, “ This is the king’s decree.” He took 
the letter, kissed it three times, placed it on his brow 








THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 27 

as a sign of obedience, and started on the journey. He 
rode on a horse which seems to have been his own. He 
describes his great joy and happiness at the thought of 
seeing the king. When he reached the king’s quarters, 
the messenger went in and informed the king of the 
arrival of Nezami. The king told his lord chamberlain, 
Shamsod-Din Mohammad, to make haste and bring that 
pious and holy man in quickly. Shamsod-Din Moham¬ 
mad came out and took the poet to the king. Then the 
poet describes the splendour of the court; the king was 
seated on his throne, wearing his crown; before him 
were huge jars of wine ; minstrels and beautiful girls were 
singing the odes of Nezami in harmony to the harp; 
whilst his cup-bearers had bowls of wine in their hands. 
Nezami entered and was presented to the kin g. The 
king’s joy at the sight of Nezami was indescribable. 
He respected the piety and abstinence of the poet and 
ordered that the wine should be taken away. He dis¬ 
missed the services of the cup-bearers and the minstrels, 
and gave orders that until the evening he wished to rem ain 
engaged with Nezami and not with harp and bowl, 
saying that the melody of Nezami’s rhyme was sweeter 
to him than that of the harp. He compared Nezami with 
the Prophet Khezr, saying : “ Since Khezr has come, 
v T e must turn away from the wine, because we obtain the 
water of life from Khezr.” When Nezami entered the 
presence of the king, he was overaw T ed, and with fear 
he went forward to kiss the king’s foot, and whilst his 
head was bent down, the king rose from his seat and 
embraced him, treated him with the utmost respect and 
kindness, and asked him to be seated. Then Nezami 
explains the sweetness of his speeches and the way he 
kept the king in joy and laughter. “ My melody 
intoxicated the cup-bearers and the minstrels.” When 
the conversation turned upon Khosrou and Shirin, the 
king’s joy increased still more. He placed his arm round 
Nezami and began to praise and congratulate him on the 
production of his romance. 







28 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

The king had already read Khosrou Shirin and knew 
well many of the scenes. Whilst the king was talking 
about incidents in the romance, he would, every now 
and then, tell Nezami what a wonderful art of eloquence 
he had created, and how the king’s name would remain 
alive through that work. After this wonderful and 
gracious reception, the king told him that it was incum¬ 
bent upon him and his late brother to make ample provi¬ 
sion for his livelihood. He asked what treasure, jewellery, 
and money did his brother give him in return for the 
book on which he spent so many years of his life. He 
also told him that he had heard that his brother was 
going to give him a village, asking him whether he had 
received it or not, and whether they had sent him the 
title deeds. The question was delicate, direct, and em¬ 
barrassing to Nezami, and it required all the faculties of 
the poet to handle the situation. It seems that the late 
king had actually given a village to Nezami, and that 
after his death the village had been taken away from him, 
probably by some powerful chieftain or courtier. One can 
guess this by the way in which Nezami answered the 
king. First he says that the fault must remain on 
the shoulders of Providence in taking away from the 
world the late king so quickly, and that, anyhow, he 
did not compose the work for the sake of reward. He 
devised his work in order that it might remain, and that 
everyone who read it should praise the composer and ask 
for God’s blessing on him. Next he sayis that the 
blessed king did give him a village from his own personal 
property, but his object in composing that sweet romance 
was a pretext for the praise of the king, and that when 
the king passed away, the whole world’s hope was lost. 
In the end he says that under such a king as rules now 
he was sure to be favoured and be able to live in ease 
and comfort. When the king heard him, he became still 
more gracious and bestowed upon him the village of Ham- 
daniyan. The India Office MS. 402 gives the name of 









THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


29 


the village as Hamduniyan. He gave him the title-deeds 
of the village, signed and sealed with the royal signature 
and seal. He wrote that he had settled that village upon 
him and after him upon his descendants, and that it 
should remain his absolute property without taxation up to 
the day of judgment. The king, further, bestowed upon 
Nezami royal robes of honour, and money, and sent him 
back home to his monastic retreat. 

On page 208, line 20, we find that a jealous person 
sneers and belittles the reward Nezami obtained. In 
order to annoy the poet, he starts sympathising with him, 
saying : “ Could they not have given him a better village 
than that small furnace whose length and breadth is 
only half a farsakli? ” Nezami answers that he is grate¬ 
ful for the favours he has received from his benefactor, 
and that the king wished to give him a village for'his 
services, and he was quite happy to receive it. When, 
therefore, the giver and receiver w T ere both happy 
and content with the transaction, there was no need 
for others to interest themselves in the matter. 

On page 209, line 8, we find a sorrowful elegy on the 
death of Qezel Arsalan, condoling his nephew and 
successor, Mo’aiyad Nosratod-Din Abu Bakr, the son of 
Atabek Mohammad. He laments that Qezel Arsalan did 
not reign long, that he did not partake of or enjoy the 
fruit of the garden of youth, and that he was murdered. 
He sends his prayers and blessings for the departed king 
and also his successor, the reigning Nosratod-Din. He 
brings this elegy to an end and says : 

“ May his soul be a companion of happiness 
Whoso says : ‘ May the mercy of God be upon 
Nezami.’ ” 

As we saw previously, the Khosrou Shirin was com¬ 
posed during the years A.H. 580-81 (A.D. 1184-85). It 
was written after the Makhzanol Asrar, therefore it must 
have been begun after A.H. 580 (A.D. 1184), and as it 
was presented to the Atabek, Abu Ja’far Mohammad, 







30 T HE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

who died in A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), it must have been 
completed before that date. 

Nezami’s eulogy on Qezel Arsalan must have been 
written after his accession to power in A.H. 581 (A.D. 
1185), and before his death in A.H. 587 (A.D. 1191); 
and the elegy on the death of Qezel Arsalan must have 
been composed after A.H. 587 (A.D. 1191), i.e. after 
the death of that monarch. These must, therefore, have 
been added to the Ivhosrou Shirin a few years after its 
completion. 

I have not followed the order of the pages as I found 
them in the Teheran edition but taken my material in the 
chronological order, in which I think it should have been 
arranged. Dr. Rieu quotes a couplet in the Catalogue of the 
British Museum, Persian Manuscripts, Vol. II, p. 566, and 
says he has taken it from the MSS. Add. 7729, fol. 81a, 
Add. 25,900, fol. 97b, Add. 27,260, fol. 109b, and other old 
copies, as well as from the Teheran edition, giving the date 
A.H. 576 (A.D. 1180-81) for the completion of Kbosrou 
Shirin. This, however, cannot be correct, firstly, because 
the couplet is given in the Teheran edition in two different 
forms and places, the second hemistichs of both couplets 
being the same, but their first ones different. Secondly, 
the couplet in the India Office MS. 402 does not give 
that date. Thirdly, the couplet in the India Office'MS. 
and one of the couplets of the Teheran edition are given 
in the scene where the friend of the poet comes in and 
rebukes him for reviving old stories of the Zoroastrians. 
These two couplets in the last two copies are also quite 
different in their second hemistichs and slightly different 
in their first ones. No matter wffiich reading of the 
different copies we take, the second hemistich is mean¬ 
ingless. On casually reading it, we think it has some 
meaning, because we expect it, but in reading it very 
carefully, we find it impossible to attach any sensible 
meaning to it. I am, therefore, convinced that it cannot 
possibly have been written by Nezami. In order to 








THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 31 

show this more clearly, I give the couplets as found in the 
different copies : 

British Museum MS. Add. 7729, fol. 81a. 

Jls jC^- j \y>- iai- A O 

India Office MS. 402, fol. 44a, 12. 

Jl" =L_S>cj j\ 

JU J jj _a-~ CrJ ji 

Teheran edition— 

(a) p. 64, 120. 

Jtr -H ’h* j' cri 
Jij cjC»- dai- J' J j 

(b) p, 204, 125. 

jt- j jllflA j -A-all 

Jl» dai- 

Moreover, as I have conclusively proved that the 
romance of Kliosrou Sliirin was begun after A.H. 580 
(A.H. 1184) and the elegy on the death of Qezel Arsalan 
written after A.H. 587 (A.H. 1191), Hr. Bieu is wrong, 
in the Catalogue of the British Museum, Persian Manu¬ 
scripts, Vol. II, p. 566, in saying that A.H. 576 (A.H. 
1180) is the precise date of the completion of Khosrou 
Shir in. 






32 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

MATERIAL FROM LEIL1 AND MAJNUN 

On page 212, line 4, we find Nezami thinking of death. 
He seems to have been very ill but does not fear death, 
because death is the road to God. Death to him is a 
garden and pleasure ground which takes him to the 
“ House of the Beloved.” He prays that, if God desires 
him to die, he may die, as death is the journey of the 
soul. 

He would submit willingly to the sleep which leads 
the way to “ the Beloved.” Since the yearning for the 
union with God has kindled his heart, he would die 
happily, knowing that he would rise equally happy. 

On page 213, line 1, we find him still praising the 
four Caliphs, saying Seddiq (Abu Bakr) was the fore¬ 
runner of truth, Faruq (Omar) had surpassed the zenith 
of heaven, and that godly and God-fearing old man 
(Osman) was a “ classmate ” of the Lion of God (Ali). 
“ All four came from one source and were sweet herbs 
grown on the same verdant bank, and ‘ the Empire of 
Religion ’ was established by these four Caliphs, and the 
House of the Faith obtained its four quarters through 
them.” 

On page 217, line 1, we have a glowing description 
of the poet’s life. He was sitting one day full of 
happiness and joy, his own divan in front of him. 
It was during the time of the rose and of the morning 
breeze, blowing and bringing him perfume. He had 
obtained his heart’s desire, and the fame of his 
eloquence had spread in every direction. It came to 
his mind that it was the time for him to work, because 
fortune and prosperity were both his companions, and 
now his mind (unfettered and unchecked by worldly 
cares) could produce wonderful scenes. He braces 
himself to be tolerant and fall into line with the 
affairs of the world. Suddenly a messenger arrives and 
brings him a letter of 10 or 15 lines, written in a beau¬ 
tiful handwriting by the king, Shirvan Shah, himself. 












THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 33 

The letter is addressed to Nezami, saying : “ Oh thou,, 
the master magician of eloquence, Nezami, produce 
another high achievement through the magic of thy 
poetry. ’ ’ He asks him in his letter to compose the romance 
of Leili and Majnun and encourages him by saying 
that this romance was the king of all love stories, and it 
was fitting that it should be composed by him alone. 
He further told him that he had read his works and 
valued them, and extolled his poetry beyond that of older 
poets. In the conclusion of his letter the king parti¬ 
cularly, but delicately, mentioned that he wished the 
book to be dedicated to him, and that, as he was from a 
noble stock, he wished his eulogy to be worthy of his birth. 
He knew, if Nezami wrote a eulogy on him, he would 
acquire eternal fame. He promised the poet to reward 
him richly. Nezami read the letter and found himself 
in a great quandary. He did not dare to disobey the re¬ 
quest, nor did he have material enough for the composition 
of the romance. He also found himself growing old and 
weak. He did not know' with whom he could discuss 
the subject, when his son, Mohammad, who was as dear 
to him as his life, took the letter from him, kissed his 
foot lovingly and sat beside him. He told his father 
that his fame had spread everywhere, that he had w r ritten 
Khosrou Shirin and filled the hearts of many people with 
love and happiness, and that he could and should com¬ 
pose the romance of Leili and Majnun, because Shirvan 
Shah had specially requested him to do so. 

We know, therefore, for certain that the Khosrou 
Shirin was written before Leili and Majnun. The poet 
addressed his son with great love and tenderness. He 
praised his beauty and determination. He explained the 
difficulties of his task, saying that he had many engage¬ 
ments and that the subject was not familiar to him. In 
the end he agreed to compose it and said that the door 
of his treasure house was opened by his son. He 
completed the romance of Leili and Majnun in four 

c 






34 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

months in A.H. 584 (A.D. 1188) and said that, had he 
nothing else to do, he would have finished those couplets, 
exceeding 4000, in a fortnight. He sent it by his son 
to Abol Mozaffar Akhsetan Shirvan Shah. He also wrote, 
on page 221, a eulogy on the heir apparent, Menuchehr, 
saying that his son had entreated him to be recommended 
to the prince. 

On page 222, he hopes that the prince, the son of 
Malek Mo’azzam Akhsetan Shirvan Shah, will read the 
Shah Nameh and learn the sayings of the wise, and that 
he will find in the romance of Leili and Majnun a secret 
treasure, hidden in a casket, like the full moon in the 
constellation of the stars. He calls his book his daughter 
and tells the prince that no one in the whole world could 
create at any time a more beautiful maiden, and that, if 
the prince did not have any regard for her father, he might 
look with favour upon her brother (Nezami’s son). 
Incidentally he gives on the same page his own exact 
age, saving that he was seven times seven when he pro¬ 
duced this bewitching song. This reference to his age of 49 
years seems to indicate that this particular passage was 
written in A.H. 588 (A.D. 1192), (the date erroneously 
given in some manuscripts as the date for the completion 
of Leili and Majnun). It was shown that he completed 
the Makhzanol Asrar in A.H. 580 (A.D. 1184), and at 
that time he was 40 years of ago. Supposing Makhzanol 
Asrar was completed in the first few months of A.H. 580 
<April-July A.D. 1184), he would, in the latter months 
of A.H. 588 (A.D. 1192), have completed his 48th year 
and entered his 49th year. 

On the same page he speaks proudly of himself and 

says : 

“ Exult, oh heart, because now is the time to be 
enraptured. 

Why should the master of eloquence be silent? ” 

He says, justly, that the arena of poetry is his alone 







THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 35 

to-day, without question, that he earns his wages by his- 
own toil, and that, if he is wealthy, his wealth is of the 
mind only. He also says that he is so perfect in the 
spells of the poetic art, that he is called the “ Mirror of 
Mystery.” His tongue is like “ a sword in eloquence 
and possesses the life-giving elixir of the Messiah.” His 
speech ‘‘ produces such an effect that the root of a 
surd is found.” The arid land of poetry becomes 
irrigated and refreshed by him as by a stream, and poetry 
rises to fame in his day. He makes light of his opponents 
who steal his poetry and says that he would rather 
people partook from his table than he from the tables of 
others. Once more in this passage he refers to his odes. 
He compares himself with an ocean which cannot be 
polluted. He says that although his face blushes for the 
misdeeds of his enemies, yet he will wash their sins off 
in an ocean and forgive them not with a soured but with 
a smiling face. The thief steals from him and calls him 
a thief instead. He says, if he has ever plagiarised others, - 
may his accusations against others bring him ill luck. 
He possesses the treasures of both worlds, and it does not 
become him to notice the theft of a poor knave. He 
wishes to give alms to the poor and does not mind whether 
they steal or claim them. He gives bis own name, 
Elyas, and he says further that all persons of fame in 
the world have enemies; Joseph could not escape the 
jealousy of his brothers, nor could Jesus the cruelty of 
the Jews, whilst Mohammad had to suffer from Abu 
Lahab. He mentions that all his life he has never 
harmed even the wing of an ant and never wished for 
the misfortune of others. He wishes to hide his wrath 
and to think that, even what he has said in anger, though 
it was done for the improvement of his detractors only, 
would have better been unsaid. He asks his heart to 
silence all its complaints, that he might suffer wrong with 
a pleasant face, to let him kiss the hand that slaps his 
face, and to let him suffer harm and do no harm. 





36 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

Next we have his advice to his son who is now four¬ 
teen years old. He draws his son’s attention to the time 
when he was seven years of age. He tells him not 
to lead a life of negligence and not to waste his time 
in play, but to acquire knowledge and virtue, wisdom 
and greatness, nor to depend upon his father’s fame for 
greatness but to acquire it himself. He urges him to be 
polite to everybody, to fear God, and to refrain from 
doing anything he need be ashamed of. 

He dissuades him from engaging in the art of poetry, 
saying he could not find fame in that art, as that was 
reserved for him only. He persuades him to study his 
own soul together with theology and medicine. He 
wishes his son to be a doctor, life-giving like Jesus, 
and not life-taking, to be a theologian full of devotion 
and piety and not full of conceit and hypocrisy. He 
again advises him to learn the meaning of every page 
he reads and, in whatever profession he engages, to learn 
it well, even were it only the making of saddles for 
donkeys. 

On page 224 we have the most beautiful Saqi Nameh 
ever written by any poet of Persia. In this Saqi Nameh, 
and in every other part of his works, whenever he speaks 
of wine, he immediately explains that he means divine 
love. By wine he means “ that wine which is pure as 
his tears and which is lawful in the religion of lovers of 
God ”. He means that wine “which is the water of life, 
which gives speech to the dumb, which is the light to 
guide travellers, and which is the key to the treasure 
of happiness which annihilates him and unites him 
with the Beloved.’’ In this Saqi Nameh we find his 
father’s name, Yusof, the son of Zaki, the son of 
Mo’aiyad. His mother, Ba’iseh, had been a daughter 
of a Kurdish chieftain, and it seems as if he had 
been brought up by his maternal uncle, Khajeh 
Hasan. The Bombay lithographed edition gives Khajeh 




THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 37 

Omar as the name of his uncle. He wishes to forget his 
past life which has been full of grief and sorrow. He 
does not wish to be an instrument in the hands of the 
mean and the low and to be compelled to submit to their 
oppression. He will leave off associating with kings and 
shun their company, be satisfied with his own portion 
and not look for his daily bread from the table of others. 
He wishes to teach himself to be happy and content with 
what he has. He prefers to give his horse up and to 
walk on foot; to carry the heavy burdens of others 
brings joy to him beyond anything else. 

On page 233, line 12, and page 236, line 5, we find 
two instances where “ Leili ” is rhymed with “ keili ” 
(meaning very) and “ meili ” (meaning a desire), which 
shows that the word should be pronounced as I have 
transliterated it, and not as “ Laili ” as transliterated by 
Dr. Eieu and “ Layla ” by Professor Browne. We find 
the same pronunciation, Leili, in Hafez and other poets. 

On page 310, line 22, in the conclusion of Leili and 
Majnun, where he calls himself the adviser of the 
divine helper, we feel the importance and the high esteem 
in which be is held as adviser of the king, Shirvan Shah. 
He counsels the king that he should, night and day, 
seek after good fame rather than anything else, and avoid 
drinking wine, though wine may be lawful for him. He 
mentions that his romance of Leili and Majnun, a hidden 
pearl, a bestower of understanding to a thousand dis¬ 
tracted ones, was completed, by the grace of the God 
of Glory and Triumph, on a Monday, 588 years after the 
Hejrat of the Prophet (A.D. 1192). 

In the Teheran edition, on page 218, line 23-24, which 
we also find in the India Office MS. 402 and the British 
Museum MSS., we have the date given as the end of 
Eajab A.H. 584 (A.D. 1188). The only way we can 
interpret these two dates is that Nezami, after the com¬ 
pletion of Khosrou Shirin in A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), had 
been requested by Akhsetan Shirvan Shah to compose 




38 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

for him the romance of Leili and Majnun, which he did 
in four months. 

Then in A.H. 588 (A.D. 1192) he wrote the advice 
to his own son who was then 14 years of age, together 
with the eulogy and advice to the then ruling king. He 
could not have written these in A.H. 584, because, as 
we saw previously, before the completion of Khosrou 
Shirin his son was seven years old, and in A.H. 584 
(A.D. 1188) he would have been 10, not 14 years of age. 
Further, the date of A.H. 588, when the son was 14 
years of age, is another indication that the Ivhosrou 
Shirin was completed in A.H. 581, and the advice to his 
son, when he was 7 years old, must have been written 
in A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185). These dates are interdependent 
and confirm each other. 

This is another instance of the incorrect and mis¬ 
leading statements of all biographers, Persian and others, 
with whom I have any acquaintance. In his Literary 
History of Persia, Vol. II, page 400, Professor Browne 
says that he has taken his material from Dr. Wilhelm 
Bacher’s very careful and scholarly monograph on 
Nezami, and gives the date of the composition of the 
romance of Ivhosrou Shirin as A.H. 571 (A.D. 1175). 
This cannot be correct, because we have just seen that 
Nezami composed the romance of Ivhosrou Shirin in 
A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), and the advice to his son in 
Ivhosrou Shirin in the same year. 


MATERIAL FROM BAHRAM NAMEH or 
HAFT PEIKAR 

On page 313, line 1, Nezami prof esses disbelief in 
astrology. He says : “ How could a star be of good or 
evil omen. If a star could bring happiness, then the 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 39 


King Kei-Qobad would have been the son of an astro¬ 
loger. Which of the astrologers has ever found a 
treasure by his calculations? ” He says he has gone 
into all the intricacies of star-knowledge, together with 
all other secret sciences, and in the end, when he found 
God, he found no more use for them. He asks God to 
befriend him at His threshold, to make him independent, 
to grant help for his needs, and not to leave him to the 
mercy of others. Since in youth he did not desert the 
threshold of God and beg at the door of others, God sent 
others to his door, and although he did not wish for glory, 
God granted it to him. 

He thus addresses God directly : 

“ Since I have grown old at the gate of Thy House, 
Protect me against my own fears.” 

He is certain that God is his, and so he possesses the 
whole world. He does not wish to tell his secrets to God, 
because God knows them anyhow. In telling his secrets 
to the world he lowers himself; in telling them to God he 
is elevated. This passage, indeed, throws a vivid light 
on the mind and consequent manner of life of the poet. 
He does not believe in astrology, but, as mentioned before, 
he was himself well versed in astronomy. It shows that 
from his youth he had chosen a life of privation and 
devotion to God, and that he had grown old when he 
wrote this book. 

On page 315, line 21, we find he has received a secret 
request from the King Ala’od-Din Qezel Arsalan, of the 
line of Aqsonqor, to dedicate a book to him. When the 
messenger presented this request, he forgot his sorrow's 
and became happy again. In planning this new wrnrk 
of his, he starts by paying a high and noble tribute to 
the genius of Ferdousi whose Shah Nam eh provides him 
with a starting point for his romance. He says that from 
that cluster of rubies little particles have been left over, 
and that from these bits he built up, like a jeweller, the 
treasure of Haft Peikar. He says whatever Ferdousi had 






40 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

left incomplete, he completed; and whatever he found 
correct, he left as it was. He had searched for a book of 
history all over the world. He mentions both Arabic and 
Persian, and specially names Bokhari and Tabari, and 
other works which he found in different libraries. Every 
page which fell into his hand he collected and, tying them 
all up in a handkerchief, he took them home and used 
them for this romance. 

He compares himself with the oyster and the older his¬ 
torians with a rain cloud, saying that, whatever drops of 
rain he receives from the cloud, he converts into pearls. 
The king had asked him to keep the composition of this 
romance an absolute secret shared by the king and the 
poet alone. He is happy in dreaming that, when he should 
present his offering to the king, the king, like Solomon, 
would bestow upon him his seal and treasures. Then 
immediately he rebukes himself in saying : 

“ Oh Nezami, thy eloquence is for thee Messiah 
enough. 

Thy knowledge is the Tree of the Virgin Mary for 
thee. 

May thy heart forget all thought of wealth 

And thy mind expel all worldly desires! ’ ’ 

In this passage again we find the king of the time 
approaching Nezami with his treasures and promises, 
in order that he may compose and dedicate a book to him. 
He mentions the sources of his material, showing that 
he wrote -with a deep knowledge and after much study. 
In the conclusion of the above passage we find him in¬ 
dependent of wealth and fortune, loftily and nobly con¬ 
tented. The king who had requested him cannot be Qezel 
Arsalan, the Atabek of Azarbaijan, who died in A.H. 587 
(A.D. 1191), but as he has mentioned him as being 
Ala’od-Din of the line of Aqsonqor, he must be either the 
Atabek of Musel, Nurod-Din Arsalan Shah, who reigned 
from A.H. 589 (A.D. 1193) till A.H. 607 (A.D. 1210-11), 
or Mansur Mohammad of the kings of Armenia, who 
reigned from A.H. 594 to A.H. 603 (A.D. 1198-1206). 




THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


41 


On page 320, line 2, he complains of the way he is 
treated by people. He says that he possesses a village, 
but yet he does not enjoy the produce of his property. 
If he enters anybody’s house as a guest, they do not even 
spread the table for him. His complaint is mostly against 
those people who belittle his intellect, while they them¬ 
selves have no intellectual capacity. He goes the way he 
is driven, and feels hurt that wealth and prosperity are 
obtained by luck and not by virtue. Next he prays to 
God that his piety and devotion may save him from the 
fire of jealousy, and that he may not be moved to envy 
by the prosperity of the undeserving. 

On the following page he gives advice to his son. 
He tells him to awake, because he himself is going to 
sleep (meaning he is approaching his end). He enjoins 
his son to acquire good fame, so that the poet who is 
imprisoned in the city may obtain more honour and 
respect. He tells him not to be afraid of difficulties and 
misfortunes, but to meet his troubles always with a heart 
full of courage and determination, because the interpreta¬ 
tion of many a bad dream is prosperity and good omen. 
He asks him to keep his covenant with God, to have no 
fear of any misfortune which may befall him, and not to 
be ashamed of acquiring knowledge, because through 
education only, physical and spiritual advancement is 
obtained. There are numerous instances in the Five 
Treasures where Nezami refers to himself as being im¬ 
prisoned in the city, yet there is not one allusion to the 
reason of this confinement. It is inconceivable that he 
should have been kept by force in the city by any ruling 
monarch. I believe this confinement was of his own 
free will; perhaps he did not wish to leave the city of 
Ganjeh and find a new abode among strangers, thinking 
it might lead to misfortunes. Perhaps there were also 
economical reasons to make his residence near his village, 
Hamdaniyan, desirable. Also the reign of terror due to 
the Assassins may have been a contributory cause. 



42 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OP GANJEH 

Piety, godliness, and the acquirement of good fame 
are the predominant ideals of the poet. His ideas of 
education are contrary to those of Sa’di, but in accordance 
with modern theory. He believed that the seed of edu¬ 
cation would bring forth fruit, no matter on what ground 
it was sown. The rigid and severe life of devotion, self- 
sacrifice, study, and hard work had made him prematurely 
old, and he feels the weight of his years. 

On page 322, line 2, he mentions that youth has 
departed from him; his cheeks have become yellow and 
his hair white. He has become weak in body, and he 
feels that he is a changed man. He says that, whilst 
young, he lived the life of the aged, and that his present 
condition could well be imagined. 

In this connection we have one of his sayings, which 
has become a household proverb in Persia : 

“ If this is the face of the ugly little Ahmad, 

What will he look like when he gets small-pox 
as well? ” 

He does not, however, lose courage, and considers 
his excellence and virtue a strong fortress protecting him 
from all onslaughts. He admits that, although he has 
lost his youth, yet the desires of youth are still with him. 
His body is old, yet his heart is still full of youthful 
desires. He does not know whether this temperament 
is peculiar to him, or whether everyone is afflicted with 
the same calamity. 

On the same page, line 9, he prays to God that he 
may not be tempted to humble himself at the threshold 
of others, that He may keep him content with what he 
has. He would rather spread his table to others than 
partake of the fare of strangers. He calls upon himself 
to work hard and, by his endeavours, to open to the world 
the gate of his treasure house. We find the poet’s life 
a continuous struggle, a life spent in hard work and in un¬ 
broken, placid contentment, independence, and trust that 
God Almighty will protect him against ill treatment and 






t he life and times of nezami of ganjeh 43 

the calumny of his enemies. His mind is noble and 
generous and prefers always to give rather than to take. 

On page 420 Nezami asks for God’s generosity and 
protection. He knows that by God’s grace his name has 
become famous, but he prays to be kept famous for 
righteousness. He prays that he may be protected from 
doing anything which would bring regret for him on 
entering the presence of God. 

Though apparently from worldly motives he dedicated 
his book to the king, his real object was to take away his 
eves from the less worthy objects of earthly comfort and 
prosperity; these did not confer real happiness and com¬ 
fort to a mind which was more worthily engaged. 

On page 431, line 17, in concluding the romance of 
the Haft Peikar, he addresses the king again and men¬ 
tions that he is imprisoned in the city, and the way of 
escape is closed in front and behind, so he sends his 
romance by a messenger. He completed the work on 
the 14th of Ramazan, 4 hours after sunrise, in A.H. 593 
(July 31, 1197). We have the same reading in the British 
Museum MSS. Add. 7729, fol. 1926, Add. 16,780, fol. 
211a, Add. 25,900, fol. 205a, Or. 1363, fol. 224, and there 
is no doubt that this date is correct. The India Office 
MS. gives the date as ba sad ha, which makes 100, but 
this is evidently a mistake. 

MATERIAL FROM THE BOOK OF ALEXANDER 
(») SHARAF NAMEH 

On page 433, line 9, we have a good description of 
the poet’s life. God is in his mind night and day, morn¬ 
ing and evening; a,t the beginning of the night, when 
he wishes to go to sleep, he praises God; when he awakes 
at mi dnig ht he calls upon God and sheds tears. In the 
morning his road leads towards God, and the whole day 
until evening God is his refuge. His only hope is that, 
when he leaves this world, and his body is decayed, 





44 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

decomposed, transformed, and when the wind has scat¬ 
tered his dust, God may then, from the threshold of His 
heavenly kingdom, keep his name alive amongst the 
living. This prayer God has most generously answered. 

On page 434, line 3, he asks God to protect him 
against the desire for worldly pomp and glory. He askB 
to be given gratitude first and then treasure, patience 
first and only then misfortunes. On the same page, 
line 23, we still find him a rigid Sunni. He writes in 
praise of the Prophet and brings forward the four friends 
of the Prophet as his witnesses. 

On page 437, line 6, he wishes to sacrifice the jewel 
of his heart to the Prophet and sings the praises of his 
four friends. Although he is firm in his love for Ali, he 
is not without love for Omar. To the eyes of his mind 
Abu Bakr is a candle and Osman a lamp. 

On the same page, line 12, Nezami gives another vivid 
description of his life. One night he had risen from his 
sleep for his night prayers, the moon was shining bril¬ 
liantly, and the air was filled with the scent of flowers 
and the perfume of roses. The sound of the caravan had 
died away, and the whole earth was as if dead. His night 
companions were asleep, and after his prayers Nezami 
again went to bed. He detached his mind from all 
worldly care and became absorbed in a sea of thoughts. 
He closed his eyes in order to keep his mind awake for 
concentration on his next composition. Whilst thinking 
of old histories, and whence to draw his material, his 
thoughts began to wander and he fell asleep. He dreamt 
that he was in a beautiful garden picking fruit and sharing 
it with everyone whom he saw. The dream of the garden 
vanished from his mind when he heard the mo’azzen’s 
call to prayer. Again his first thought returned while 
now fully awake. This dream exercised a powerful in¬ 
fluence over him and urged him to proceed to the com¬ 
position of the Eskandar Nameh. Again he refers to 
mean and unworthy people who steal his poetry. 







THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJBH 


45 


On page 438, line 16, we find him satisfied and happy, 
because no one has accused him of robbing others of the 
fruit of their work. They steal his poetry openly and take 
it from Ganjeh to Bokhara where they sell it cheaply, 
“ because stolen property is cheap.” He is certain that 
the thieves will be caught, and although he, from whom 
the property is stolen, does not complain, yet the thief will 
get his deserts. He does not take the law into his own 
hands, nor does he complain to anyone in authority. He 
leaves it to Providence who is the best avenger of evil. 

On page 438, line 21, the poet asks the cup-bearer 
to give him the divine wine, the elixir of forgetfulness. 
Next he returns to the happy consciousness of how his 
fame has spread everywhere, and though he has become 
old, yet the vigour of youth persists. 

The poet, in the romance of Eskandar Nameh, often 
talks of his old age. On the following page, line 7, his 
youth has departed and carried away the pleasures of life, 
but he does not regret it. His sinews have become 
weak and his bones brittle. The wind of autumn has 
entered the garden of his life. He calls himself the old 
nightingale lamenting the withering of the red rose. His 
stature is bent with old age. At the age of 50 his con¬ 
stitution is impaired; his cheeks have lost their bloom 
and become sallow. His feet have become feeble, and 
his nature demands more rest and sleep. He has lost 
the key of happiness, and his heart often inclines towards 
the time for his departure. He cannot now live a life 
of youth and vigour, as even in his youth He lived a life 
of old age and humble devotion. He says, if he could 
afford it, he would retire and live with ease and comfort. 
The severe discipline and mode of living, the foregoing 
of all pleasures and most of the necessities of life, con¬ 
tinuous hard work and study, sleeplessness on account of 
his long prayers at night, seem to have made the poet 
feel old at an age not much over 50 years. He is very 
proud and fond of his great fame. It is possible, how- 




46 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

ever,' and, most probable, that this passage was written 
during the composition of the second part of the Eskandar 
Nameh, i.e. in A.H. 599 (A.D. 1202-03), when, as it will 
he shown, when we are dealing with that last composition 
of his, he was sixty years old. Both parts of the Eskan¬ 
dar Nameh are of the same metre, and it is possible that 
after his death, when his works were collected, some of 
the passages were misplaced. 

On page 439, line 25, we find the poet a spiritualist 
in the most modern sense of the word. His ideas closely 
conform with those of Sir Oliver Lodge and Sir Arthur 
Conan Doyle. He asks us, when we pass his grave and 
see that his body has turned to dust, and that his dust 
has been scattered by the wind in every direction and 
has been forgotten by the world, that we should lay our 
hands upon his resting place and remember his pure 
spirit. We should then pray for him, and he would send 
us his blessing down from heaven. He tells us that, what¬ 
ever we would pray for, Ee would ask God to grant it; 
that if we take the journey to his grave, he would take the 
journey from heaven and come down to meet us. He 
■wishes us to consider him as alive as ourselves, and tells 
us that, although we do not see him, yet he sees us. 
Further on he asks us, on the same page, that when we 
reach his resting place, we should fill our cup with 
wine and walk towards his grave. He explains that 
by wine he does not mean the material wine but divine 
love and self-forgetfulness. His cup-bearer is the 
promise of God and his morning drink is annihilation. 
He swears that all his life he has never polluted his lips 
with material wine, and says : 

“ If I have ever defiled my mouth with wine, 

May God make everything which is lawful unlawful 
to me.” 

Then he again addresses the cup-bearer, telling him to 
awake and give the pure wine to the pure lover, the wine 
which is as clear as water and is lawful in every religion. 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


47 


The India Office MS. 402 gives “ the four religions ” 
instead of “ every religion As we have shown pre¬ 
viously, when we were dealing with his romance of Leili 
and Majnun, Nezami followed his religious precepts most 
strictly; he w 7 as a total abstainer, and never in his life 
tasted the forbidden wine. His source of inspiration, 
contrary to nearly all other Persian poets, was his devo¬ 
tion and love for the Deity and not material wine. 

On page 440, line 9, he advises us not to sit in the 
seat of the great, until we have become great. Then he 
says, that on account of his good nature, his affairs are 
in disorder, hinting that his poetry is being stolen by 
other poets, and that the poets before him kept thieves 
at bay by the violence of then- natures; but he does not 
wish to do so. He says, why should he paint himself 
black in order to frighten the children on the road. He 
is happy that he was created with a loving nature, and 
wishes to continue to live so. He is happy, not only 
because he has bestowed a pearl on every one, but also 
because he has immortalized his own name. Next he 
tells us to listen to many poets who have praised him 
and have called him the lord of eloquence. He is far 
removed from the intrigues of people, is far above others 
in intellect, yet he is the humblest of all. 

In his works Nezami often complains of the thieves 
who steal his poetry, and this seems to have been a 
continual source of irritation to him. He compares his 
heart to fire which radiates more light the more it is fed 
by thorns. He takes no notice of his enemies’ abuses 
and makes them friends by returning good for evil. 

He gives the goodness of his nature as a reason for 
his great fame and is sure that, even when he dies, his 
grave will be a place of pilgrimage. Here we find a true 
picture of Nezami, as painted by himself. 

Further on, on the same page, he tells us that he 
has no desire for gold and treasures, because he believes 
that he who is poorer is richer. Worldly belongings, in 







48 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

his opinion, are a source of trouble. He who possesses 
little, has little to worry about. 

On page 431*, line 17, we have another true descrip¬ 
tion of the poet’s life. He is weary of a strenuous life 
and longs for rest. We hear him once more choosing a 
life of seclusion and retirement. His retirement from 
the world this time is complete and absolute. He locks 
the door of his house and shuts himself up from the 
world. He does not know, nor does he want to know, 
what is happening outside. He compares himself to a 
dead man who is carried along in the caravan of the 
world. He relies on God for his sustenance, and says that, 
if he had the ability, he would supply the need of all the 
needy ones. He mentions that from fear of death he 
dares not lift his head, but we are not told the cause of 
his dread. As he did not find comfort and happiness in 
the world, he shut himself up in his cell and lived for 
forty days a life of total self-denial. 

On the following page, line 2, he tells us that he 
did not spend his life in pleasure and play, that he did 
not sleep happily one night, unless he had unlocked one 
secret door of wisdom. Never could he have produced 
his great poetry, had he not worked so hard, and some¬ 
times under great difficulties. 

Then he tells us that he saw in a dream the Prophet 
Khezr who gave him much encouragement and asked 
him not to repeat what Perdousi had already said. When 
he awoke, the thought which was passing most through 
his mind, was that of Alexander the Great. After paying 
a noble and glowing tribute to Perdousi, he says that 
in Perdousi’s book many things were left unsaid, and that, 
had Perdousi wished to write everything that had happened 
in ancient times, his book w 7 ould have been too lengthy, 
that he wrote what he thought absolutely necessary to 
write and left unsaid the parts which did not appeal to 
him. He gives the above reasons for writing the Book of 
Alexander, which he calls in the same passage Sharaf 






THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 49 


Nameh-ye Khosrovan. We can certainly say that the 
Eskandar Nameh of Nezami is a complement only to that 
part of the Shah Nameh of Ferdousi which deals with 
the career and conquests of Alexander the Great. Dr. 
Rieu does not give any reason for his assumption, on 
page 564 of the Catalogue of the British Museum , Persian 
Manuscripts, Yol. II, that Nezami once contemplated 
writing a book, Sharaf Nameh-ye Khosrovan, as a com¬ 
plement to the Shah Nameh of Ferdousi. I take it that 
Dr. Rieu means that the Sharaf Nameh-ye Khosrovan 
was contemplated but never written by Nezami, and that 
it was to be a complement to the whole of the Shah 
Nameh. If so, Dr. Rieu cannot be correct, but at least 
this is what he says. Nezami says himself that Sharaf 
Nameh-ye Khosrovan is a complement to the Shah 
Nameh of Ferdousi only so far as that part of the Shah 
Nameh is concerned which deals with Alexander. The 
Sharaf Nameh-ye Khosrovan, i.e. the first book of the 
Eskandar Nameh is, therefore, an accomplished, not a 
contemplated work. 

He dedicates this book to Nosratod-Din Jahan Pah¬ 
levan (see page 434*, line 20). This Nosratod-Din, alluded 
to by Nezami as having six letters in his name, is Abu 
Bakr, the son of the Atabek Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan. 
The designation, Jahan Pahlevan, which he uses in men¬ 
tioning Nosratod-Din, belonged to both Abu Bakr as well 
as to his father Mohammad. We have the same reading 
in the British Museum MS. Add. 7729 in its prologue of 
the Sharaf Nameh, but the India Office MS. gives that 
couplet in the prologue of the Eqbal Nameh. 

On page 436*, line 12, he explains that he received 
an order from the king, asking him to dedicate this book 
to him. This shows another instance of kings being 
desirous that their names should be mentioned by Nezami 
in his works. 

On page 433*, Nezami tells us that he intends to write 
three sections on Alexander the Great. His first will be 







50 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

on the conquests of Alexander, his second on the wisdom 
and philosophy of the great conqueror, and his third on 
his prophetship. The section on Alexander’s prophetship 
is very short compared with the other two, and is included 
in the second book of Alexander, the Eqbal Nameh. It 
seems as though the poet wrote a long section on the 
prophetship of Alexander, and after the death of the poet 
those good Moslems who collected his works, omitted a 
great number of passages from it and incorporated it in 
the Eqbal Nameh. 

On page 437*, line 2, he mentions the difficulty of his 
task. He could not find the history of the great con¬ 
queror in one book. He collected material from the pages 
of different writers. He mentions that he has found his 
material also in Hebrew, Armenian and Pahlevi history 
books. He had to translate them into Persian first and 
use them as his sources. He also says : 

“ He who knows any of these languages, 

His tongue will not be ready to criticise.” 

Besides the many accomplishments of Nezami, such as 
his great command of the Arabic and Persian languages, 
his knowledge of astronomy and mathematics, his great 
poetical talent, we find him a linguist in these other three 
languages. 

On page 438*, line 12, he mourns the loss of his friends. 
He tells us that he has remained and that his sympathisers 
have departed. On the same page, line 15, we find him 
in a happier mood, which shows that these two passages 
have been written at different times. In this latter passage 
he calls upon the cup-bearer to fill his cup with a wine 
which is the foundation of religion. He calls upon the 
gardener “ to be joyful and open the gate and decorate the 
garden, because the time of the rose has come, and Ne¬ 
zami has entered the garden from the prison city ”. 

In such a beautiful and heart-ravishing season, Nezami 
enters the garden and sits under a tall cypress tree. The 
scent of the rose and the shade of the rose tree had in- 






THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 51 


toxicated the nightingale. His wife, a beautiful bride, 
enters the garden to pick roses. He describes her hair, 
which was hanging down to her knees, her face like a 
rose, and her laughing lips scattering sweetness. Her 
cheeks, under drops of perspiration, were like the petals 
of the rose under drops of dew, and she gave him a cup 
of the juice of sugar cane and told him to drink it in 
honour of the king. In this passage we find that Nezami 
had married again, and he has a deep love and great ad¬ 
miration for his wife. 

On page 439*. line 10, we are told by Nezami’s own 
words that he first completed the Makhzanol Asrar, a 
task in which he did not hesitate a moment. After that 
he engaged himself in Shirin and Khosrou; from these 
he pitched the pavilion outside and knocked at the door 
of the love of Leili and Majnun. When he disengaged 
himself from this romance, he galloped his steed towards 
the Haft Peikar; and now at the banquet of eloquence 
he would beat the drum of the fortune of Alexander. 

On page 508, beginning with line 22, is a eulogy on 
the king, the son of Akhsetan. This shows that Menu- 
chehr III actually gained the throne of Shirvan, a fact 
not mentioned in any historical work. In this eulogy 
Nezami expresses his condolence on the death of Akhsetan. 

Scholars are either silent, particularly Persian, or 
else confused as to the date of the death of King Akhsetan. 
W. Barthold in his article on Shirvan Shah. C. L. Huart 
in his on Khaqani, B. Berthels in his on Nezami (all in 
the Encyclopaedia of Islam), and E. G. Browne in his 
Literary History of Persia, do not mention any date for 
the death of this monarch. Dr. Rieu, in the Catalogue 
of Persian MSS. in the British Museum, Yol. II, p. 559, 
states that Akhsetan died in or shortly after A.H. 584. E. 
de Zambaur, in his Manuel de Genealogie, p. 182, gives 
A.H. 566 for the death of Akhsetan. Lane Poole, in his 
Mohammadan Dynasties, does not mention the Shirvan 
Shahs at all. Dr. Hadi Hasan, in his admirable Falaki 
Shervani, has proved by numismatic evidence, that Akh- 







52 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJBH 

setan died between A.H. 593 and 600 (A.D. 1196-1203). 
As the Sharaf Nameh in which the above eulogy occurs 
was finished in A.H. 597, the period for the date of the 
death of Akhsetan is reduced to between A.H. 593 and 
597. 

On page 509, line 7, Akhsetan is rhymed with golsetan, 
which shows that Akhsetan is the correct spelling. 

On page 565, line 5, Nezami says that, when he com¬ 
pleted this banquet (Sharaf Nameh), he started the next 
one, and when he had finished half of it, it seemed as if 
God had given him half the world. He says that, if he 
lives, he will compose, by his experience and poetic talent, 
the other half in such a manner as to awake those asleep 
and to make the fish in the sea dance in rapture and 
ecstasy. 

On the same page, line 17, is the eulogy on King 
Nosratod-Din. He says that, on account of the justice 
of King Nosratod-Din, everyone drinks wine to his 
health. “ Farang, Palestine, and the monks of Rome 
receive and obey his orders with love. ’ ’ The poet says that 
he had no befitting offering to lay before his royal throne, 
therefore from Alexander’s water of life he made this 
lustrous pearl, and when he finished it, he sent it to his 
court as an offering. 

On the following page, still addressing the king, he 
says that he is the nightingale who has flown from the 
mythical garden of Eram and has made his nest in the 
king’s garden. He will sing such a melody in his time 
that for many years the king’s name would remain in the 
world. He gives the date of the completion of the Sharaf 
Nameh as A.H. 597 (A.D. 1200), which, however, is not 
given in the India Office MS. 402, nor in the British 
Museum MS. Add. 7729. This date, however, is found 
in the later copies of the British Museum, Add. 26,147, 
fol. 226, Add. 26.146, fol. 143, and Add. 25,799, fol. 176. 

We saw previously, when we were dealing with the 
material from page 449, beginning from line 8, that when 
Nezami finished the Haft Peikar, he started on the Es- 







THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 53 

kandar Nameh. Also we proved that the Haft Peikar 
was completed in A.H. 593 (A.D. 1197), therefore the 
date A.H. 597 (A.D. 1200) can be accepted as the date of 
the completion of the Sharaf Nameh, notwithstanding its 
absence in the earlier copies. 

On the same page, line 15, the poet says that he has 
dedicated the book to the king, in order that the painting 
of the king may gild the poet’s pen. Further on he says 
that he did not write this book for gold, and had he 
written it for gold, he could never have produced 
poetry like pearls. It was his love which compelled him 
to do this work, and although the poet “ had little to say, 
yet love had plenty.” 

On page 567, line 3, we have the third instance of 
Nezami’s advice to his son. He tells his son not to 
spend his life in play. He wishes him to remember the 
time when he was playing at the age of seven, and ex¬ 
plains to him how the age of childhood and play passed 
away like a phantom. He reminds him of his fatherly 
advice, when the child was seven years old, and tells 
him it should be more precious to him than beautiful 
rubies. He also reminds him that he gave advice to him 
when he was fourteen years old and exalted him like a 
beautiful cypress. Then he tells him that he is now 
seventeen years of age and should possess seventeen 
good qualities. This last couplet, giving the age of his 
son as seventeen, and the mention of seventeen qualities, 
is, I am convinced, tampered with and is not in the 
form and style in which Nezami wrote it. The couplet 
is of loose diction and has neither propriety of thought 
nor precision in diction. We only guess the meaning from 
the loose and uncouth arrangement of its ungrammatical 
and redundant words. In the second hemistich of the 
couplet there are unnecessary words placed to fill up a 
gap in the metre and to supply the rhyme. There is not 
one instance in the whole of Nezami’s works of over 
35,000 couplets where he has used unnecessary words to 




54 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

fill up a gap in the metre or where he sacrifices the mean¬ 
ing to the rhyme. His command of language was such as 
to make it impossible for us to change one word of a couplet 
without destroying its music and altering its meaning. 
With Rumi it is a different matter. In his Masnavi he 
very often uses words without any other object than to 
fill gaps. Whenever Rumi could not find a word which 
would supply the requirements of his rhyme, metre and 
meaning, he immediately would coin a word. The Five 
Treasures of Nezami, if we reckon an average of sixteen 
words to a couplet, contain over half a, million words. 
It has.been found extremely difficult to change one single 
word in a couplet without distorting the meaning or spoil¬ 
ing its beauty; while it is possible even to improve upon 
certain couplets of other poets by the substitution of one 
or more words. Nezami’s poetry seems to be like a 
delicate and highly artistic painting, the effect of which 
is destroyed, if a part is taken away or substituted. 
To show the point more clearly, I give here the couplet 
in question and leave it to the judgment of the reader : 

I O' jj 

r jHii X - J.AA, 

It is, however, most likely that he has actually men¬ 
tioned the age of his son to be seventeen, only I doubt 
if all the words in the above couplet are his or are in 
the form in which he composed them. 

In the following line he tells his son that he has 
informed him of everything which it was befitting to 
know. He tells him that he has four precious books, 
every one of which is a fatherly memento for him. They 
are his four brothers, and the fifth brother is he, the 
son himself. This line clearly shows that Nezami wrote 
this advice to his son when he had completed the Haft 
Peikar, his fourth book, and not during the composition 
of the Eskandar Nameh. Had he written this advice 









THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 55 


when he had completed, or when he was composing the 
Eskandar Nameh, he would have said that his son had 
five brothers. In the next line he tells his son to act, 
not according to his own wishes, but according to those 
four codes of law. If he ever wished to find a key to 
knowledge, he would find it in the first line of that letter 
(of advice). 

On the same page, line 18, he says that, when he com¬ 
pleted this half of the book, he enthroned himself on the 
throne. Still addressing his son, he says that he has left 
in his book souvenirs specially for him, so that he may 
read and obtain freedom from fetters and servitude, and 
that kingship and propbetship are both found therein as a 
memento of his father. In conclusion, he prays that 
his son may be happy and prosperous in the world, and 
that Nezami may live through him. 

It seems that part of this advice belongs to a 
more comprehensive address or counsel, written after 
Nezami had completed his first four books, and part of 
it belongs to an advice written when he completed the 
first part of his fifth and last book, Eskandar Nameh. 
The passage which mentions his son’s age as seventeen, 
if we have his actual words, must have been written in 
A.H. 591 (A.D. 1195), because in A.H. 588 (A.D. 1192), 
when he wrote the advice to his son, the son was fourteen 
years of age. 

M4TERIAL FROM THE BOOK OF ALEXANDER 
(b) EQBAL NAMEH 

On page 570, beginning at line 11, we find Nezami 
extremely sad. He mourns the loss of his youth and 
the loss of his helper and admirer through whom he had 
been able to produce rare and noble poetry. He says 
that, before he could produce his poetry from the blood 
of his brain, he had a hidden admirer who used to converse 
with him in secret. Now that his admirer had become 
silent, he has forgotten his speech also. Moreover, the 
hearer who used to listen to his poetry, has also dis- 






56 


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


appeared from the world. “ Since King Arsalan went 
and slept in the dust,” he says, “ how could one 
compose in this condition? ” Then he says, maybe 
that the empire of the king would help him and bring 
back his speech again to him. These couplets are also 
found in the British Museum MS. Add. 7729, fol. 273 
and the India Office MS. 402, fol. 381a. 

Qezel Arsalan was killed in A.H. 587 (A.D. 1191), 
about ten or eleven years before the composition of this 
book. This reference to the death of Qezel Arsalan must, 
no doubt, have been written during, or even before' 
the composition of the first part of the Eskandar Nameh] 
as it is improbable that the poet should mourn him after 
so long a time. It will be shown that the Eqbal Nameh 
was completed in A.H. 599 (A.D. 1202). The loss of his 
helper and admirer seems to mean the loss of his wife, 
because in this passage he mourns the loss of two people,' 
one the admirer who used to converse with him in secret] 
and the other the hearer, Qezel Arsalan. 

On the same page, line 17, we are given an interesting 
aspect of the life of the poet. One night, which seemed 
to him darker than a grieved heart,” he was engaged 
in solving a problem “ more minute than a hair’s 
bieadth. He could not find his way to a solution of 
the mystery. It seemed that Providence had made a 
blank wall in front of him,” and his mind was blank 
and darker than the black night. On that night he was 
like a diver gathering pearls, until a third of the night 
had passed. The remaining two-thirds of the night 
seemed to him extremely long. The bird of time had 
come to a standstill; the nightingale had stopped singing. 
He spent the whole of that dreary night in “ weaving 
gold brocade of seven colours ” (meaning composing 
poetry). He says that when he used to spend his nights 
in that manner, he had a lord of favours who was his 
helpei and bestowed upon him his needs. He mentions 
the name of that lord of favours as Khajeh Emad of Iihoi, 
and says that the position of the poet became exalted 









THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 57 


through him. He had filled the world with the treasure 
of generosity and had bejewelled liberality by caskets of 
pearl-like eloquence. The poet had not seen anyone in 
the world except him who possessed both generosity and 
poetic talent. He mourns that the games of Providence 
have for some time hidden him, and that he has neither 
a sympathiser nor a mate and companion. On that night 
he could neither eat nor sleep; he was meditating on 
the subject matter of his composition which he wished 
to present to the king. In the morning he got up without 
having had any sleep or rest and began the composition 
of his book. He says that many years have passed since 
the jewel worshipper has obtained such a gem as this, 
meaning that it is a long time since any king had obtained 
such perfect gems of poetry in his praise. The jeweller 
had now obtained the precious stone, and those who 
want to buy perfect pearls have to buy them from him 
who possesses them. 

It is important to note that during the time of Nezami 
there was no art of printing, so that the poet could not 
print and sell his poems and obtain a livelihood. The 
only thing a poet could do was to- try to please the kings 
and nobles of his time, to compose panegyrics in their 
praise and leave the reward to their magnanimity and 
generosity. If we remember that Nezami, like some other 
great poets, had no source of income except what he could 
obtain through his poetry, this continual complaint of 
his poverty is understandable. When we constantly hear 
of his needs and of his being ill-treated, we must not think 
that he was greedy. He had to live, and in order to 
devote his time freely to the composition of poetry, he 
should have had enough to live on. Even after being 
requested by kings to dedicate his books to them, which 
he did, they do not seem to have rewarded him, except 
the ill-fated Qezel Arsalan. 

On page 571, line 17, he says that, when the king 
asked him to decorate a garden, plant jasmine and cypress 




58 


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


trees for the happiness of the wise king, through his 
(the poet s) knowledge and obedience, he planted such a 
beautiful cypress tree, that under its shade all drink wine 
with joy in the name and to the memory of the king. 

On page 572, line 1, he says that, although his enemies 
wish him ill, yet they obtain blessing and honour through 
his favour. They all read and study his grammar, commit 
his words to memory, and use his style in their letters 
and documents. This clearly shows that he has written 
a grammar which does not exist now. He says that he 
has obtained the blessing of leadership in style and com¬ 
position, because he has turned his face away from the 
world and chosen a life of retirement and seclusion. He 
advises them not to give up a, life of retirement and self- 
sacrifice, if they wish to obtain the key to the treasure 
of eternal happiness. He considers this life as a vision, 
the life of privation as a fearful dream, and when the 
morning comes (meaning when one unites with the 
Deity) the interpretation of that bad dream will be joy 
and happiness. 

On page 574, line 4, Nezami calls upon himself to 
break through the fetters of Ganjeh, and says : “ How 
much longer remain in the fetters of Ganjeh? ” Then 
he say that, although he is lost, like a pearl, in the city 
of Ganjeh, yet he is from the Qohestan of Qom. There¬ 
fore, as stated previously, he must have belonged 
originally to the mountain districts of Qom. 

On page 574, line 7, is found a dedication to King 
Ezzod-Din. This Ezzod-Din is described as being de¬ 
scended from Davud, and as having inherited the empire 
from Mahmud. There was an Ezzod-Din Kei-Kavus I., 
one of the Saljuqs of Arzerum, who ruled from A.H. 607 
(A.D. 1210) to A.H. 616 (A.D. 1219). He was a direct 
descendant of Qelej Arsalan Davud, the second ruler of 
the Saljuqs of Asia Minor and a great-grandson of Arsalan 
Peighu, the son of the original Saljuq. There was also 
another Ezzod-Din Balban, the eighth and last of the 





the life and times of nezami of ganjeh 59 

Shahs of Armenia, who reigned during A.H. 603-4 (A.D. 
1206-7). There are also two Atabeks of Musel who are 
called Ezzod-Din Mas’ud. They are the father and son 
of Nurod-Dm Arsalan Shah I. Mas’ud I. reigned A.H. 
572-89 (A.D. 1176-93), Mas’ud II. reigned A.H. 607-15 
(A.D. 1210-18). None of these Ezzod-Dins reigned at 
the time when Nezami was writing this portion of the 
Eskandar Nameh. It is probable that either one of the 
first two or the last of these four monarchs, in order to as¬ 
sociate his name with the works of Nezami, requested his 
own court poet to make a few couplets, incorporating his 
name in the panegyric. As a matter of fact, the India 
Office MS. 402 and the Teheran edition give also the 
name of the king as Jahan Pahlevan Nosratod-Din. 
This Nosratod-Din is Abu Bakr, the son of Mohammad 
Jahan Pahlevan, the son of Ildegez, one of the Atabeks 
of Azarbaijan, to whom the Khosrou Shirin, the Haft 
Peikar, and the Sharaf Nameh and the Eqbal Nameh were 
dedicated. Even in the Teheran edition, which names 
Ezzod-Din on page 576, line 8, the last hemistich of 
the second couplet, we find Nezami praying that the 
ruler may be for the world as Jahan Pahlevan. It is also 
important to note that Nezami gives the designation 
Jahan Pahlevan not only to Mohammad, but also to 
Nosratod-Din in his eulogy on that ruler, both in his 
Sharaf Nameh and Eqbal Nameh. 

On page 583, line 1, we find Nezami a monogamist. 
He says : “ Do not ruin the harvest of thy life by marry¬ 
ing several wives, one mate would be enough for thee. 
If thou dost marry several wives, thou wilt not have the 
affection of any one of them.” ‘‘A son, as pure as a gem, 
can only be born when the mother and father are united 
together in one heart.” In this connection it is necessary 
to notice that, although Nezami married several wives, 
yet he never had more than one wife at a time. He only 
married another wife, after he had lost one through death. 

On page 583, line 9, we find Nezami stricken with 






60 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

grief and sorrow. He has lost his wife, and the tone of 
his language conveys to us the extent of his misery. He 
first describes the death of the mistress of Archimedes 
and says : ‘ ‘ The rose has fallen in the dust; the singing 
nightingale has fled from the garden, and the dust has 
enveloped that fairy in the same way as fairies kidnap 
human beings.” Then he mentions that the king, from 
his great munificence and liberality, gave him in marriage 
a handmaiden far superior in beauty, love, wisdom, and 
chastity to the mistress of Archimedes. He adds : ‘‘When 
she made my eyes the source of light, the evil eye took 
her away from me, and Providence snatched her away as 
though she had never lived. How can I explain the 
happiness I had through her? May God be content with 
her.” Further on he continues that it had been his 
portion, strangely enough, that whenever he renewed, 
through his composition, the old stories and sweetened 
the lives of the people with his heart-ravishing words, he 
lost a bride. 

On the same page, line 14, we are told the number 
of wives he has had, all of whom he has lost. When he 
composed the Khosrou Shirin, he gave alms for the bless¬ 
ing of the soul of his departed wife. When he built the 
wall around the treasure of Leili Majnun, he lost another 
wife, and now when this book is completed, he entrusted 
to the Guardian Angel another bride. He adds then, in his 
grief and despair, that he does not know how he can relate 
the stories of Rome and Rus (Russia) in spite of the sorrow 
of the loss of so many wives. He then philosophically 
answers himself by saying that it is better for him to 
forget the old sorrow and try to occupy his mind with the 
composition of these stories. We know from this passage 
that he married three wives, all of whom he lost, the 
first, when he completed the Khosrou Shirin, and whose 
death we have previously mentioned, when we were deal¬ 
ing with the material from the Khosrou Shirin. He lost 
this wife, the daughter of the ruler of Darband, in 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 61 


A.H. 581 (A.D. 1185), and from her he had a son, 
Mohammad. He lost his second wife when he com¬ 
pleted the romance of Leili Majnun. When he was 
composing the first part of the Eskandar Nameh, he gave 
us a hint that he wished to marry again, and said that, 
although he was old, the desire of youth had not departed 
from him. He must have married his third wife soon 
after he made that reference. His third wife cannot have 
lived with him longer than two years. As a matter of 
fact, all his wives had a very short life, and he had only 
one son from the first. 

On page 642, beginning with line 11, there is a eulogy 
on King Ezzod-Din. A few lines further on he says : 
“ Which of the kings possessed such a banquet except 
he who was both king and Jahan Pahlevan? ” This 
Ezzod-Din is either the Ezzod-Din Qelej Arsalan II., one 
of the ruling Saljuqs of Asia, Minor, who reigned during 
A.H. 551-84 (A.D. 1156-88), or Ezzod-Din Balban, the 
eighth and last Shah of Armenia, who ruled during A.H. 
603-4 (A.D. 1206-7), or Ezzod-Din Mas’ud I., the Atabek 
of Musel, who reigned during A.H. 572-89 (A.D. 1176-93). 
But as he refers to him as being Jahan Pahlevan, it is 
probable that he is Abu Bakr Nosratod-Din, the son of 
Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan. As a matter of fact, 
although both names could be made to supply the metre, 
yet Nosratod-Din fits better in the hemistich than 
Ezzod-Din. 

On page 643, beginning at line 5, still addressing the 
king, he says that, as he is unable to pay a personal visit 
to his court, he is sending him two pearls brought out from 
the sea of his mind. These pearls had obtained their 
lustre from him, one of them possessed the chastity of 
the Holy Virgin Mary, and the other had been lit by the 
light of Jesus. In beauty one was comparable with the 
full moon, and the other, like the sun, was incomparable 
in its divine light. The name of one was Moqbel and 
that of the other Eqbal, and they were sister and brother. 









62 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

He asks the king that, as he has sent his heart and soul 
to his court, they may be sent back in such a manner 
as the poet hoped and expected. He adds in con¬ 
clusion that he had nothing more to say but to leave 
the matter entirely to the king himself. These two 
gems, I think, must be his son and the second part of 
the Eskandar Nameh. The first part of the Eskandar 
Nameh was called by him Sharaf Nameh. It is interest¬ 
ing to note here that, when he sent his romance of 
Khosrou Sliirin to Shirvan Shah, he called that romance 
Moqbel also. It is, therefore, difficult to suppose 
that Nezami meant that the second part of the Eskandar 
Nameh was called Moqbel. Probably the word Moqbel 
is used, not only here, but also in the Khosrou Shirin, 
as an adjective. Eqbal either means his son Mo¬ 
hammad or else the second part of his Eskandar 
Nameh. In either case, he wishes the king to keep 
one, Moqbel, and send him back the other, Eqbal. If 
we suppose by Eqbal he meant his own son, Mohammad, 
we must not presume that Eqbal was the boy’s name 
either; the word should thus be taken as an adjective. 
If, however, by Eqbal he meant the second portion of the 
Eskandar Nameh, we must suppose it stands for Eqbal 
Nameh. 

On the same page, beginning from line 14, he tells 
us that he must seek an intelligent buyer of his pearls, 
so that the name of the jeweller may not be lowered in 
the eyes of the people. Poetry requires a hearer as well 
as a composer, and a jewel without a buyer is of no use. 
What was the good of his pearls to him, if there w T as no 
one who knew their value and would buy them from him. 
His customer did not know the value of perfect pearls, 
so that he might pay for them liberally, but those 
who understood precious stones and knew their value, 
followed him in great numbers. As soon as he obtained 
a unique gem, they began to stone him, saying : “ Give 
us thy gem, or we will kill thee.” The poet becomes full 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 63 

of anger at their outrage; they expect to possess them¬ 
selves of rare and priceless gems without paying for them. 
In the end he asks : “ How could a person expect to raise 
his name and fame through eulogies which he wished to 
obtain meanly? ” This passage explains quite clearly 
that, after he sent his eulogy and the two parts of the 
Eskandar Nameh to the king, he was not rewarded for 
them. It also shows us that dedications and eulogies 
have been. demanded from him by the king, and even 
threats have been used in order to obtain them. It also 
demonstrates to us Nezami’s independence and fearless 
attitude towards the king in refusing to allow himself to 
be robbed of the fruit of his toil, and refusing to remain 
complacently quiet and submissive under extortion. 

On page 644, line 3, Nezami says that, although he 
is old, yet his poetic talent has not diminished, that he is 
still fifty-seven years of age, although he looks a hundred. 
Four couplets later he says that, although he is sixty years 
of age, his condition has not changed. This line is given 
in the India Office MS. 402, fob 422a, line 12, and in the 
British Museum MSS. Add. 7729, fol. 315a, and Add. 
25,900, fol. 319a. Evidently the first couplet must have 
been written three years before the second, and they do 
not belong to the same place. He must have written the 
first when he had completed, or when he was composing 
the first part of the Eskandar Nameh, which he completed 
in A. H. 597 (A.D. 1200). The second couplet must have 
been written in A.H. 599 (A.D. 1202). These two couplets 
prove still more the accuracy of our dates, not only for the 
composition of the two parts of the Eskandar Nameh, but 
also for the exact date of his birth. At the beginning of 
A.H. 597 (A.D. 1200) he had completed his fifty-sixth 
year and had entered his fifty-seventh, therefore he must 
have been born in A.H. 540 (A.D. 1145). At the end of 
A.H. 599 (A.D. 1202) he had completed his fifty-ninth 
year and had entered the sixtieth year of his life; this 
again shows the year of his birth as A.H. 540 (A.D. 1145). 








64 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

On the same page he describes an incident in his life 
during his youth. One day he was grieving over the 
death of his parents and other relatives and began to 
weep. At night he dreamt that one of his relations spoke 
to him and told him that he might grieve over the de¬ 
parture of his dear ones only on the condition that he 
could guarantee not to join them himself. 

On page 645, line 1, he tells us that the dream produced 
such an effect on his mind that from that night onwards 
he did not grieve for his departed ones, but prepared 
himself for his own journey. 

On the same page, line 7, he says that he has com¬ 
pleted his Persian story, and prays that it may be as 
auspicious as the name of King Mas’ud, that when 
the king reads it, wisdom may be his helper and know¬ 
ledge his friend, and that this story may be exalted 
through him and the king be profited by it. In con¬ 
clusion, he adds the prayer that Nezami may be happy 
and that his name and fame may be raised high through 
his rhyme, a prayer that God has graciously answered. 

The British Museum MS. Add. 7729, fol. 276b, gives 
the full name of this Mas’ud as Ezzod-Din Abol Path 
Mas’ud, the son of Nurod-Din, but the India Office MS. 
402, fol. 422b, line 7, gives the name of the king as 
Mas’ud, and fol. 421a., line 3, gives the title as Ezzod- 
Din. This Ezzod-Din Mas’ud was one of the Atabeks 
of Musel and was placed on the throne at the age of 
fifteen, after the death of his father in A.H. 607 (A.D. 
1210). He ruled until A.H. 615 (A.D. 1218). The name 
Ezzod-Din Mas’ud must, therefore, have been added in 
the works of Nezami after his death, most probably by 
a court poet of that young monarch who wished his name 
to be associated with the works of Nezami. 

There is no date given for the completion of the Eqbal 
Nameh either in the Teheran lithographed edition or in the 
oldest manuscripts, such a-s the India Office MS. 402 or the 
British Museum MS. Add. 7729, but it is stated in 






T H E LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 65> 


the British Museum MS. Add. 16,782, fol. 117, as well as- 
in the Calcutta edition, page 190, that the last part of' 
the Book of Alexander was completed on the 10th day 
of Ayar, A.H. 599 (31st May, 1202 A.D.). 

On page 642, line 3, is a record of the death of Nezami 
written by some unknown person. It is stated there that, 
when Nezami completed that work, he prepared himself 
for his departure, and that it was a long time since the 
page of the history of his life had been completed. It 
says his age was sixty-three years and six months when 
he “ beat the drum of departure ”. At the time of his 
death he talked to his friends about the road and the 
guide to the divine presence, and laughed and said, 
that the Forgiver had made him hopeful of His for¬ 
giveness. When he was saying these words he went 
to sleep as though he had never been awake. This 
passage is also found in the India Office MS. 402, fol. 
431, the British Museum MSS. Add. 7729, fol. 313b, 
and Add. 25,900, fol. 317, the only difference in this 
passage between these manuscripts and the Teheran litho¬ 
graphed edition is that in the Teheran edition it says : 
“It is a long time since he has departed.” From the 
Teheran edition we would conclude that this passage 
was written some time after the poet’s death, while from 
the manuscript versions we understand that the passage in 
question was written soon after the death of Nezami. 
If we take this passage as conclusive and authentic, and 
we have no reason to do otherwise, Nezami must have 
died in the middle of A.H. 604 (A.D. 1207). 

This concludes the survey of the material for the life 
and times of Nezami, taken from his own works, and I 
end this part of the work by repeating Nezami’s prayer, 
namely : 

“ May God bless him who says, may God bless 
Nezami.” 

The life of Nezami was inseparably bound up with the 
events of his time, and his upbringing, education, and 

D 









66 T HE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

mode of life were necessarily influenced by the dis¬ 
turbances, political upheavals, wars, and the rise and 
fall of dynasties and empires. It is, therefore, necessary 
to give here a short account of some of the most important 
events which took place during his span of life. He 
was a rigid Sunni, and therefore Baghdad and its Caliphs 
must have been the sanctuary of his heart. He was in 
the midst of the Esma’ilis, and their activities, with 
those of the Eatemid Caliph of Egypt, must to his 
mind, as to the minds of many other Moslems, have been 
most bewildering. His patrons were Toghrel, the last 
Saljuq ruler of Persia, and the Atabeks of Azarbaijan, 
therefore he must have felt the effect of the overthrow 
of the Saljuq Empire and its great officers, the Atabeks, 
by the slaves and servants of one of the kings of that 
dynasty, namely, the Shahs of Kharazm. He also wit¬ 
nessed the gradual break-up of the Ghaznavid Empire, 
and the magnificence of the court of these great rulers, 
contrasted with the meanness with which Eerdousi was 
treated by the greatest sovereign of that empire, was ever 
present in the mind of the poet. My main authorities 
for some of the most important events which he witnessed 
during his lifetime are the following :—The Tarikh-e 
Gozideh, the Rouzatos Safa, the Rahatos Sodur, and the 
Habibos Seyar. The paramount position and importance 
of the Caliphs of Baghdad demand our notice first. 

THE ABBASID CALIPHS OP BAGHDAD 

In A.H. 529 (A.D. 1133) the Abbasid Caliph Mostar- 
shed was a prisoner at Maragheh in the hands of the 
Saljuq Sultan Mas’ud, the son of Mohammad, the son 
pf Malek Shah. While the prison guards were absent, 
a few of the Assassins entered the prison and murdered 
the Caliph. Mas’ud pursued the Esma’ili Assassins, 
captured them, and put them to the sword. The Caliph 
was buried at the College at Maragheh with all the pomp 
and ceremony compatible with his dignity. 









the life and times of nezami of ganjeh 67 


A year previous to liis capture by Ma’sud, Mostarshed.. 
while a Caliph at Baghdad, had nominated his son Bashed 
as a successor to the Caliphate after him, and had obtained 
the allegiance of the nobles of Baghdad for his son and 
successor. When the news of the murder of the Caliph 
reached Baghdad, Bashed was proclaimed Caliph and 
obtained once more the allegiance of the nobles and also' 
of the chief commissioner of the city, who was a servant 
of Mas’ud. In A.H. 530 (A.D. 1136) Mas’ud sent a 
messenger to Bashed demanding the tribute of four hun¬ 
dred thousand dinars which the late Caliph had agreed 
to pay yearly to him. Bashed considered the payment 
of tribute below the dignity of a Caliph, refused to pay, 
and ordered the inhabitants of Baghdad to attack the 
commanders of the army of Mas’ud, who were at that 
time in Baghdad. The Saljuqs fled from the city; mean¬ 
while, the Caliph omitted the name of Mas’ud from the 
Khotbeh. Mas’ud, on hearing this, marched on Baghdad. 
The army of the Caliph was defeated outside Baghdad, 
and Mas’ud besieged the city for fifty days. After the 
siege the Sultan left for Nahrevan. The Caliph Bashed 
fled from Baghdad to Musel, and from Musel to Mara- 
gheh. Mas’ud marched on Maragheh and defeated the 
Caliph, who then fled to Ispahan. There he was 
murdered by one of the Bsma’ili Assassins, whom the 
attendants of the Caliph captured and put to death; this 
Caliph was buried in Ispahan. During the time in which 
Bashed had fled from Baghdad, Mas’ud entered that city 
and appointed Moqtafi as Caliph. After two or three 
days the Sultan sent a messenger to the new Caliph, 
asking him to give a detailed list of all the requirements 
and expenses of himself and his servants, so that they 
might be supplied. The Caliph answered that every 
day forty mules were bringing water to him to Baghdad t 
and that the Sultan could guess his other requirements 
accordingly. The Sultan took over all financial, military, 
and civil affairs from the Caliph and did not let him 
have any voice in any important affairs of the empire. 






68 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

After the death of Mas’ud in A.H. 547 (A.D. 1152) 
the Caliphate at Baghdad became once more independent, 
and Moqtafi would not permit any of the Saljuq Sultans 
to enter Baghdad. This Caliph died in A.H. 555 (A.D. 
1160). On the death of the Caliph Moqtafi, Nezami was 
fifteen years old, and before the death of Mas’ud we could 
hardly expect that the poet would have taken any interest 
in the political affairs of the world. After the death of 
Mas’ud, Malek Shah, his nephew, became the Sultan. 
He was fond of pleasure and lived a dissolute life which 
roused the anger of his courtiers and nobles, who im¬ 
prisoned him in a fortress at Hamedan in A.H. 548 (A.D. 
1153) and seated his brother Mohammad on the throne. 
In A.H. 551 (A.D. 1156) Mohammad sent an ambassador 
to Baghdad to request the Caliph to cause his name to be 
mentioned in the Khotbeh. The Caliph did not grant 
his request, consequently he marched on Baghdad and 
besieged that city. The Caliph had fortified the city, and 
the inhabitants of Baghdad defended it with great courage. 
Meanwhile disturbances had broken out in Azarbaijan, so 
Mohammad raised the siege of Baghdad and returned to 
quell the disturbances in Azarbaijan. Afterwards cholera 
broke out in Baghdad, and a great many of the citizens 
perished. 

In the year A.H. 552 (A.D. 1157) the Caliph Moqtafi 
ordered that a beautiful door be made for the Ka’beh. 
They took the door and fixed it on the Ka’beh, taking 
to Baghdad the old door, from whose wood the Caliph 
made a coffin for himself. He died in A.H. 555 (A.D. 
1160). Mostanjed, his son, had already been nominated 
by bis father as his successor, but when the Caliph was 
dying, his younger son, Abu Ali, raised a claim to the 
Caliphate. His mother had bribed the amirs and nobles, 
so that, after the death of Moqtafi, they should elect Abu 
Ali as Caliph. As most of the people had already given 
their allegiance to Mostanjed, there were great dis¬ 
turbances in Baghdad. The step-mother of Mostanjed 




THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 69 


had arranged with her servants to kill him as soon as 
he entered the palace to pay a last visit to his dying 
father. He heard of this plan and took ample precautions 
for his own safety. On becoming Caliph he imprisoned 
his step-mother, together with her son, Abu Ali, and 
caused all her servants who had conspired in the attempt 
on his life to be drowned in the Tigris. He was Caliph 
for eleven years and died in A.H. 566 (A.D. 1170). 
Mostazi succeeded his father, Mostanjed. He was 
famous for his justice and generosity. At the beginning 
of his Caliphate, Qotbod-Din Qeimaz was the chief amir 
of the Caliph. He had usurped from the Caliph great 
powers and would act independently of him and 
without consulting him in any important matters of 
state. If he disliked any order from the Caliph, he 
would not put it into execution. In A.H. 570 (A.D. 
1174) Qeimaz decided to arrest the Prime Minister, 
Zahirod-Din Attar. The Prime Minister took refuge with 
the Caliph, and Qeimaz ordered his house to be plundered. 
After the plunder of Attar’s house, Qeimaz, with the 
crowd, marched to the palace to demand the surrender 
of the Prime Minister from the Caliph. When the Caliph 
heard the clamour of the mob, he ascended to the roof 
of his palace and shouted to the people, saying : “ Qeimaz 
has transgressed his limits, therefore his property belongs 
to the people and his blood to the Caliph.” On hearing 
this, the mob turned on the house of Qeimaz for plunder. 
He managed to escape the fury of the mob, and fled 
towards Musel, but he perished on the way from heat 
and thirst. 

It is related that, when the mob were busy plundering 
Qeimaz’s house, a poor man found five bags of gold in the 
house, but did not know how to take them away through 
the mob. Whilst roaming about, thinking what to do with 
them, he found himself in the kitchen where cauldrons 
of food were boiling. Dropping the sacks of gold into 
one of the boiling cauldrons, he put the steaming pot on 




70 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

his head and forced his way through the crowd. The 
mob laughing at him, remarked, “ Could you not find 
anything better to carry? ” He answered that his wife 
and children were hungry, and that this was the most 
welcome thing they wanted at the time. In this manner 
he took the gold home. 

Towards the end of Nezami’s life relations between 
the Caliph Naser and Mohammad Kharazm Shah were 
strained, which resulted in the siege of Baghdad by 
Kharazm Shah in A.H. 614 (A.D. 1217). This siege 
proved disastrous to the army of Mohammad Shah, who 
lost most of his men through cold and snow. It weakened 
greatly the power of Mohammad Shah, and the repeated 
sieges of Baghdad had also lessened the prestige of the 
Caliphs. This helped to prepare the ground for the in¬ 
vasion of the Mongols in A.H. 617 (A.D. 1220), the 
greatest calamity the world as a whole, and Persia in 
particular, has ever experienced. 

THE GREAT SALJUQS AND THE KHARAZM 

SHAHS 

When Nezami was born, the power of the last Great 
Saljuq, Sultan San jar, had started to wane. His vassal, 
Atsiz, a descendant of a favourite cup-bearer of Malek 
Shah, had already rebelled against and been subdued by 
Sanjar. Atsiz, who was a governor of Kharazm, made 
an alliance with the Qara, Khata’is and incited them to 
invade Sanjar’s territory. Sanjar suffered his first crush¬ 
ing defeat in A.H. 536 (A.D. 1141) at the hands of the 
Qara Khata’is in Transoxiana. In this battle he lost a 
hundred thousand men, together with the cities of Marv 
and Nishapur, whilst Atsiz proclaimed his independence 
and ruled in Kharazm. Meanwhile, the Glioz tribes, who 
had, with the permission of Sanjar, crossed the Oxus and 
settled in the neighbourhood of Balkh, rebelled against 
him. The cause of the rebellion was the quality of 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OP NEZAMI OP GANJEH 71 


twenty-four thousand sheep which they had agreed to 
supply yearly to the governor of Sanjar as a tax. Upon 
hearing of their rebellion, Sanjar, with a, hundred thou¬ 
sand men, marched against the Ghoz. The Ghoz were 
overawed and submitted to payment of a heavy fine beside 
the required number and quality of the sheep, but Sanjar 
would not hear of this. Consequently the nomads fought 
desperately, won the battle, and captured Sanjar himself. 
They then ravaged Marv, Nishapur, and the province of 
Kerman, committing untold atrocities and ravaging the 
country wherever they went. In A.H. 552 (A.D. 1157) 
Sanjar managed to escape from his captors. When he 
reached Marv, on seeing the ruined condition of his 
country, he did not wish to live any longer and died in 
the same year at seventy-three years of age. 

Meanwhile, his unfaithful vassal, Atsiz, who had died 
a year previously, left his son, Il-Arsalan, on the throne 
of Kharazm or Khiveh, which stretched as far east as 
the province of Jand on the Jaxartes. After Il-Arsalan’s 
death, Takesh in A.H. 590 (A.D. 1194) overthrew the last 
Saljuq, Togbrel II., who, as we have seen, was one of 
Nezami’s patrons. Thus, the greater part of western 
Persia was added to the Kharazm Empire. Takesh 
reigned till A.H. 590 (A.D. 1194) and his son, Ala’od-Din 
Mohammad, succeeded him on the throne. Ala’od-Din 
extended his empire in every direction, subduing Balkh 
and Samarqand, annexing the western province of the 
Qara Khata’i Empire, and bringing under his own suze¬ 
rainty the province of Ghur and Ghazneh. 

In the archives of Ghazneh he found letters written 
by the Caliph Naser, urging the Ghurid to unite with 
the Qara Khata’i against Kharazm. This was a great 
cause of annoyance to Mohammad Shah, who nominated 
a descendant of Ali, Seiyed Ata’ol Molk of Tarand, to the 
Caliphate, and as we saw when dealing with the Caliphs 
of Baghdad, he was obliged to give up the march on 
Baghdad on account of the loss which his army suffered 
through severe cold and a heavy snow-storm. 




72 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

THE SALJUQS OF ERAK, KORDESTAN, AND 
AZARBAIJAN 

During the reign of Sanjar, the last Great Saljuq king, 
Mas’ud, his nephew, the son of Mohammad, the son of 
Malek Shah, was ruler of Erak and Ivordestan and, as 
mentioned when we were dealing with the Abbasid Caliphs, 
Mas’ud had besieged Baghdad twice during the caliphate of 
Mostarsbed and Bashed. He w T as responsible for the 
defeat, capture, and death of these two Caliphs and the 
appointment of Moqtafi. After his victories over the 
Caliphs of Baghdad, he became the independent ruler of 
(Persian) Erak, Fars, and Mesopotamia. He had several 
wars with his brothers and relatives, in all of which he was 
victorious. He is well known in history for his valour and 
justice and for his kindness to the poor. His first war, 
after his victorious return from Baghdad, was with the 
governor of Fars, who had rebelled against him. He sent 
his brother, Saljuq Shah, in company with Qara Sonqor, to 
quell the rebellion. Qara Sonqor distinguished himself 
with the utmost bravery in that battle, conquered Shiraz, 
gave the city to Saljuq Shah, and returned to Hamedan, 
where he died soon after. Mas’ud appointed the Atabek, 
Ildegez, as successor of Qara Sonqor and made him 
governor of Azarbaijan. When Mas’ud was at the zenith 
of his power, Abbas, a deputy of Sanjar, was governing 
in Rei. Sanjar, for some reason not mentioned in Habi- 
bos Seyar, was displeased with Abbas. He deputed 
Mas’ud to arrest him, and Mas’ud, who was then in Hame¬ 
dan, marched on Rei to capture Abbas. Before Mas’ud 
reached Rei, Abbas came forth to meet him, and present¬ 
ing him with great gifts, expressed to him and Sanjar 
his loyalty, submission, and humility to such an extent 
that Mas’ud pardoned him and returned to Hamedan. 
Soon after , Mas’ud started for Baghdad. Whilst he was in 
Baghdad, the faithless Abbas made an alliance with the 
enemies of Mas’ud and installed in Ispahan Soleiman, 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 73 

the brother of Ma’snd, as king. Mas’ud left Baghdad 
with a, great army to quell this disturbance. When he 
reached Holvan, he encountered a severe snowstorm and 
cold which prevented him from advancing further. He 
returned to Baghdad and started in the following spring 
with a large army for Erak (i.e. Persian Erak). Mean¬ 
while Abbas, with the brother of Mas’ud, Soleiman, and 
Malek Shah, were encamped near Hamedan, prepared to 
fight Mas’ud. On the approach of Mas’ud, the con¬ 
federates fled to Rei, and Mas’ud, pursuing the fugitives, 
entered that city and captured and imprisoned his brother. 
Abbas, having presented himself to Mas’ud, again asked 
for forgiveness, which was granted him. Mas’ud again 
returned to Baghdad and this time took Abbas with him. 
While in Baghdad, Abbas conspired with the Caliph, 
Moqtafi, to murder Mas’ud. Having obtained informa¬ 
tion about this conspiracy, Mas’ud had Abbas hanged on 
the following day. One of the confederates of Abbas, 
Buzabeh, was the governor of Ispahan, and on hearing 
of the execution of Abbas, he rebelled against Mas’ud. 
On hearing of the rebellion of Buzabeh, Mas’ud left 
Baghdad hurriedly for Ispahan. Buzabeh had prepared 
a great army and marched out of Ispahan to give battle 
to Mas’ud, but was defeated, captured, and ordered to be 
cut in two. This battle was the last serious engagement 
in which Mas’ud fought, and after this victory no other 
enemy of his dared to stand against him. The remainder 
of his reign passed mostly in peace and prosperity. He 
died in A.H. 547 (A.D. 1151), and was buried at Hame¬ 
dan. At this time Nezami was seven years old. We do 
not know whether he was in Era-k or in Azarbaijan during 
the first seven years of his life, but although these up¬ 
heavals influenced his life, upbringing, and education, yet 
we can hardly suppose that he paid much attention to 
them. 

After the death of Mas’ud, his nephew, Malek Shah, 
became king. He was a man fond of pleasure and lived 




74 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

a dissolute life, preferred the company of women and 
minstrels, and would not give attention to the affairs of 
the empire. His nobles and courtiers, therefore, im¬ 
prisoned him in a fortress at Hamedan and seated his 
brother Mohammad on the throne.. After a few days, 
Malek Shah managed to escape from prison, and fled to 
Khuzestan, and on the death of his brother in A.H. 555 
(A.D. 1160) he entered Ispahan and proclaimed himself 
the rightful king, but died a few months later. The first 
thing that Mohammad Shah did when lie became king, 
was to kill Khas Beg, who was one of the most important 
nobles and courtiers of the late Mas’ud. This was a signal 
for great disturbances and rebellion in his empire. On 
hearing of the murder of Khas Beg, the amirs and nobles 
of Azarbaijan, including Ildegez and Aqsonqor, the son 
of Khas Beg, proclaimed Soleiman Shah, the son of 
Mohammad, the son of Malek Shah, king. Mohammad 
Shah at last subdued Azarbaijan with the greatest diffi¬ 
culty and died in A.H. 554 (A.D. 1159). 

Nezami was then fifteen years of age, and, whether 
resident in the district of Qom or whether at Ganjeh, 
he must have witnessed these disturbances and have felt 
the effect of these wars. 

After the death of Mohammad, his uncle, Soleiman 
Shah, the son of Mohammad, who was the sixth monarch 
of the Great Saljuqs, was brought from Musel to Hamedan 
by the amirs and courtiers, and in the beginning of A.H. 
555 (A.D. 1159) was placed on the throne. In order to 
please the great Atabek, Ildegez, he designated the 
adopted son of the Atabek as his heir presumptive. This 
adopted son was Arsalan, the son of Toghrel, the son of 
Mohammad, the son of Malek Shah, the third Great 
Saljuq monarch. Soleiman Shah was prone to a life of 
ease and pleasure, and neglected the military, civil, and 
financial affairs of the country. The ministers advised 
the Atabek Ildegez to dethrone Soleiman Sliah and to 
seat Arsalan Shah in his place. Consequently the Atabek, 



THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 75 

in company with Arsalan Shah, started from Azarbaijan 
towards Hamedan. When they arrived near Hamedan, 
the ministers and courtiers of Soleiman Shah, who had 
been eniaged on account of the mode of life he was living, 
joined the Atabek Ildegez, took and imprisoned Soleiman 
Shah in a fortress at Hamedan, and placed Arsalan Shah 
on the throne. Soleiman Shah died in prison in A.H. 556 
(A..D. 1150); he had reigned only six months. 

Arsalan Shah was a high-minded king, possessed of 
great tolerance, patience, and, munificence. He was en¬ 
dowed with great kindness and a forgiving spirit and 
was fond of fine clothes and good food, but he did not 
pay much attention to the finances of the country. 
Neither he nor his courtiers, it is related, ever used bad 
language. The whole of his dominions, through the 
help and wisdom of the Atabek, were prosperous, and 
whosoever invaded his territory was turned out, defeated 
by Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan and his brother Qezel 
Arsalan, the two brave sons of the Atabek, i.e. the two 
step-brothers of Arsalan Shah. Arsalan Shah died in 
A.H. 571 (A.D. 1175), when Nezami was thirty-one years 
of age. The Atabek Ildegez, with his two sons, Jahan 
Pahlevan and Qezel Arsalan, together with his grand¬ 
son, Abu Bakr Nosratod-Din, were Nezami’s greatest 
patrons. During the reign of Arsalan Shah, his two 
governors at Pei and Ispahan, i.e. Hosamod-Din Inanej 
and Ezzod-Din Qeimaz, united together, rebelled against 
him and marched on Hamedan, which was the capital of 
the Saljuqs of Erak and Kordestan. They were defeated ; 
Qeimaz fled to Rei, and Inanej to Mazanderan. Mean¬ 
while, the king of the Abkhaz attacked Azarbaijan with 
a great army. Arsalan Shah marched to Azarbaijan to 
meet his enemy, and near the fortress, Kak, a great 
battle was fought between the two armies. Arsalan 
Shah was victorious, a great number of the army of the 
enemy was slaughtered, and the remainder fled, leaving 
great booty behind for the army of the Sultan. After 






76 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

his victory over the king of the Abkhaz, Arsalan Shah’s 
next campaign was against the Assassins who had forti¬ 
fied themselves near Qazvin and were a constant source 
of trouble to the people and were plundering the property 
of the inhabitants of that town. In this campaign he 
was successful and, in a short time, destroyed their strong¬ 
hold, the Char Sofeh. This campaign must have greatly 
interested Nezami who, being a Sunni, can have had no 
sympathy with the Assassins. 

In A.H. 559 (A.D. 1164), Inanej, who had previously 
fled to Mazanderan, attached himself to the court of 
Takesh, the Kharazm Shah, asked for and received from 
him an army, and invaded Erak. He started plundering 
and committing atrocities in the neighbourhood of Qazvin 
and Abhar. Arsalan Shah, in company with the Atabek 
Ildegez, advanced on Qazvin and once more defeated 
Inanej, who again fled to Mazanderan and again invaded 
the province of Rei in A.H. 563 (A.D. 1167). The Sultan 
on this occasion sent his step-brother, Mohammad 
Jahan Pahlevan, against him, and Mohammad, having 
been defeated, returned to Hamedan. Then the 
Atabek Ildegez himself marched against the enemy, 
and without fighting he concluded peace with him. One 
of the terms of peace was that Inanej should accompany 
the Atabek Ildegez to Hamedan and become one of the 
king’s ministers. In Hamedan, on the night before he 
was to be received by the king, he was found murdered. 
Afterwards Arsalan Shah bestowed the governorship of 
Rei on Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan, the son of Ildegez, 
who married the daughter of Inanej, from whom he had 
a son, Qotlogh Inanej. 

In A.H. 568 (A.D. 1171), the mother of Arsalan Shah, 
who was the wife of the Atabek Ildegez, died; her hus¬ 
band, the Atabek, also died the following year. Arsalan 
Shah promoted Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan to the 
title of his step-father, the Atabek. He never re¬ 
covered from the grief for the death of his mother 



THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 77 


and step-father and died of grief in A.H. 571 (A.D. 
1175). Sliarafod-Din of Ispahan, the great poet, was a 
contemporary of Arsalan Shah and consequently a con¬ 
temporary of Nezami. 

After the death of Arsalan Shah, Toghrel, his son, 
a boy of seven, succeeded him. He is well known for his 
bravery, justice, and liberality, and besides being a poet 
himself, he was a patron of Nezami. He is, moreover, 
a landmark in history, being the last of the Saljuqs of 
Erak and Kordestan. His Prime Minister was the Atabek 
Jahan Pahlevan Mohammad. In the beginning of his 
reign, the king of the Abkhaz again invaded Azarbaijan 
from one quarter, while from another quarter his uncle 
Mohammad, the son of Toghrel, the son of Mohammad, 
the son of Malek Shah, rebelled and invaded Erak. 
Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan and his brother, Qezel Ar¬ 
salan, in one month defeated both these enemies. As 
long as the Atabek, Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan, -was 
living, the dominion of Toghrel was immune from in¬ 
vasion. Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan died in A.H. 582 
(A.D. 1186), and after his death, invasion by his enemies 
became more frequent, and disorder broke out in many 
parts of his territory. 

It is interesting to note that Anvari’s prediction of 
the great gale, which we have mentioned before, was in 
the same year. In that year also great differences and 
quarrels arose between Toghrel and his uncle Qezel 
Arsalan, which resulted in great wars between them, 
and at last Toghrel was deposed, captured, and imprisoned 
by Qezel Arsalan. After the murder of Qezel Arsalan in 
A.H. 587 (A.D. 1191), Toghrel was set free and regained 
his throne, but he could not prevent the invasion of his 
dominions by his enemies, nor could he adequately deal 
with the many rebellions which broke out in all parts of 
his territories. In A.H. 590 (A.D. 1194), Qotlogh Inanej, 
with the help of Takesh Kharazm Shah, once more in¬ 
vaded Erak and, this time, defeated and killed Toghrel. 






: °W« 

gS■§' 


bw 

■ • cd 

HCn ^ 
H* 4^ 

r® 

9=i 

er 


o= 


►> o 

OWp 

i-*'cn 3 ” 

g£3 

Of go 
Pj 


w 


02 


£ 


tei 

■s 

Pi 


Q3 -; 

P 

B 
p 
p 


■V y*-*s 

* t> s 

S3<^- 

JW 

.»6i t5 
_1 CO P. 


> 55 

b > 

S S 
S gL 
->-* pi 1 - 
t> B 
b iji 
B* 

I— 1 pi 

K & 


CD "3 

<-t- 

H 9 
► P 
w , 

ft cb 
« «<J 


• a* 


W 

9® 

•B.- 

*§>’ 


W55 

cn uD 

CO “ 

O' O 

-—^aq _ 

■ > P 

r. *-* 

Q CD 


Pwg- 

bfn g 

oi &3 - 

5 P 

Pj 


eng 3 

cji O 

** 5T 
_> g - 
'»§’ 
S 02 

cn tf* 

® @i 

cr 

m 

£- 

*3’- 


► 

b£ 

> &■ 

b 3 


► 

b3 

I w 

>■ 

a &• 

i-J 

> 

b 3 

-pi w 
CD h>J 
m .-ST 


o 

P- 

I 

I 

pi 


E'pSP. 

7^ P p 

CSg* 

U 1 to b 


> o 
t"crq- 
a tr 
i-j 

O £L 
Cjj 


!*► 

b 


§ b to 


£g 

CXi ^3 

-> %■- 

® 02 

H-* P 

O pi 

3 tr 


-£■ i 
¥1 \ 


’ J* >" 

• CO 

M @L 

S 

Of 3 


O 

p» 

. <i - 

p 


p?~ 

pi 


tej 

3- 

pi 


g 


^ g 3 

O £1 


SS — 1 

03 

pi 


;> 

a 

CO 

£- 

pi 


£-«- 

“ Hj 


o ® 


2- 

°tr 

c 


w 

ex 

991 

ex 


Table I. The GREAT SALJUQS and the SALJUQS of ERAIv, KORDESTAN, and AZARBAIJAN 
The Great Saljuqs Saljuq 





Table II. THE ATABEKS OF AZARBAIJAN 


8 


N " 
CD . 

^3 


W 

< 


fl 

teg 

2 

Ctl 

H 


' CD . 

g s 

CO LO 

«3 <j 


a 

leg 

<D 

2 

eg 

Ph 

G 

teg 

_ eg 
^~3 


2 ” 

eg iO 

Ik 

§3 

-g 


jCQ 


icg « 

A £S 
m H 
© 

_i © 

-Gw 
icg „ 

r* 'ts 

Cg a, 
GO 

Jh & 

<1 •§ 


a a 

icd 5 
t> 2 
® 53 
-Q ^ 


ed 

P-l 

ID 

X> 

N 

& 


w 

< 


G 

leg 


" CD 

I 

m f-4 


CD 

G 

icg 

G 


SP 

IS 

o* 


ja 

cd 

_FQ 

3 

,3 

<1 


Q 

< 

E3 

LO 

K 

< 





78 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 

THE ATABEKS OE AZARBAIJAN 
As the most important patrons of Nezami were the 
Atabeks of Azarbaijan, it is necessary to have a brief 
account of the family, specially as all except the last of 
them have been mentioned and eulogized by Nezami. 
It was a custom in the province of Qepchaq that, when¬ 
ever a merchant bought forty slaves in one transaction, 
he paid for only thirty-nine and had one extra slave free. 
During the reign of the Saljuq Sultan Mas’ud, a merchant 
had a transaction such as this in Qepchaq. He paid for 
thirty-nine slaves and demanded forty, i.e. one extra 
slave free, and received Ildegez, who was short and ugly. 
The merchant carted the slaves to Erak of Persia. One 
night on the way, Ildegez, being very sleepy, fell out of 
the cart and was picked up twice, but the third time, 
either intentionally or unintentionally, he was left on the 
road, where he went to sleep. Waking up in the morning, 
he found himself alone and abandoned. He then joined 
a caravan and reached his companions in the evening. 
His master was surprised to see him, and when they 
arrived at their destination, the minister of Mas’ud, the 
fourth monarch of the Saljuqs of Erak, bought the thirty- 
nine slaves for the king. He did not buy Ildegez on 
account of his ugly and unseemly appearance. Ildegez 
started to weep, and said that, if the minister bought these 
slaves for the pleasure of his heart, he should buy him 
to please G-od. The minister, having heard this, bought 
him also, and when presenting the slaves, he mentioned 
to the king what Ildegez had said. The king later on 
entrusted Ildegez to one of his amirs to teach him riding 
and archery, in which arts he became proficient in a short 
time. Later he became a kitchen boy to the guards. 
He distinguished himself as a cook, the king heard about 
the delicious food he used to make, and looked upon him 
with greater and greater favour every day, until at last 
he became one of his amirs. The king gave his sister-in- 
law, the widow of Toghrel, by whom she had a son, 










THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 79 


Arsalan Shah, in marriage to Ildegez, bestowed upon 
him the title of Atabek and gave him the governorship 
of Azarbaijan. The Atabek, through his justice and 
sagacity, made Azarbaijan tranquil and prosperous and 
subdued the great amirs who were too often prone to 
rebellion and disorder. As we have seen before, after the 
imprisonment of Soleiman Shah in A.H. 555 (A.D. 1160) 
in the fortress of Hamedan by the nobles and ministers, 
the Atabek in accord with the other ministers and amirs, 
proclaimed his step-son, Arsalan Shah, the son of Toghrel, 
king. The Atabek himself took in his own hands the 
affairs of the empire and spread his authority in Erak also. 
He was the virtual ruler of the whole empire of the Saljuqs 
of Erak, Kordestan, and Azarbaijan, in which capacity he 
distinguished himself to the utmost, and died in A.H. 568 
(A.D. 1172). After his death, his son, Mohammad, 
succeeded to his father’s office. Soon after, Arsalan Shah 
died of grief for the loss of his mother and step-father , and 
Mohammad, the son of Ildegez, seated Toghrel, the son 
of Arsalan Shah, on the throne. Toghrel was a.boy of seven 
years at the time of his accession, therefore the manage¬ 
ment of all the affairs of the kingdom were in the hands 
of Mohammad, the son of Ildegez. Mohammad distin¬ 
guished himself in his office, and organised the affairs of 
Erak and Azarbaijan to such purpose that other ruling 
monarchs feared him, sent embassies to his court, ex¬ 
pressed their sincerity and love towards him, and asked 
for his friendship. After ten years of regency and of 
rule, although not nominally yet in fact, over Erak, 
Azarbaijan, and Kordestan, he died in A.H. 581 
(A.D. 1185). He was known as Atabek Mohammad 
Jaban Pahlevan, and he, his father Ildegez, his 
brother Qezel Arsalan, and his son Abu Bakr Nosratod- 
Din, -were the great patrons of Nezami, in whose names 
he wrote extensive eulogies in most of his works. 
Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan left four sons, namely, Abu 
Bakr, Qotlogh Inanej, Mir-e Miran and Uzbek Pahlevan. 





80 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJ EH 

The Atabek Qezel Arsalan, during the regency of his 
brother, was the governor of Azarbaijan. After the death 
of his brother he left Hamedan, the capital of Toghrel, 
whose chief adviser and amir he became. Before his 
arrival in Hamedan, Qepteh Khatun, the wife of Mo¬ 
hammad, claimed the title of chief amir for her son, 
Qotlogh Inanej, but when the Atabek Qezel Arsalan 
arrived at Hamedan, she gave up the claim and married 
Qezel Arsalan. Soon afterwards, disagreements and 
quarrels broke out between Toghrel and Qezel Arsalan, 
which resulted in several battles. At last Qezel Arsalan, 
with an army from Tabriz, marched on Hamedan. Togh¬ 
rel, not having power to resist him, fled. Qezel Arsalan 
entered the capital, remained there for a few days, and 
afterwards departed for Azarbaijan, after which Toghrel 
returned once more to Hamedan. Through the instiga¬ 
tion of the Atabek Qezel Arsalan, the amirs of Erak 
rebelled against Toghrel and marched on Hamedan. 
When they reached the suburbs of the capital, they sent 
a message to Toghrel, expressing their regret and asking 
pardon for their rebellious attitude towards him, and said 
they wished to present their loyalty and sincerity per¬ 
sonally to the monarch. The Sultan, believing them, 
sent back an answer saying that on the morrow, when he 
would be playing polo in the field, he would receive them 
and renew his covenant with them. They met on the 
following day as arranged, but suddenly the amirs took 
hold of the Sultan and imprisoned him in the fortress 
of Alanjaq. The Atabek Qezel Arsalan, on hearing this 
news, proceeded to Hamedan and wished to proclaim 
Sanjar, the son of Soleiman Shah, king. Meanwhile, an 
ambassador came from Baghdad to Qezel Arsalan with a 
message from the Caliph Naser to the effect that the 
Caliph thought that the dignity of kingship befitted the 
Atabek himself more than anyone else. The Atabek was 
overjoyed at this message and proclaimed himself king. 
Qotlogh and other amirs of Brak, who considered them- 


THE LI FE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 81 


selves superior to Qezel Arsalan in lineage, could not bear 
him as their overlord. So one night, in the first week of 
his reign, in A.H. 587 (A.D. 1191), they went to his 
palace, killed him in his sleep, and divided the country 
between themselves. Toghrel, through the efforts and 
loyalty of some of his amirs, obtained his freedom, col¬ 
lected an army, attacked and destroyed his unfaithful 
amirs near Qazvin, and once more ascended the throne. 
After the murder of Qezel Arsalan, the Atabek Abu Bakr 
Nosratod-Din, the son of Jahan Pahlevan, succeeded his 
uncle as governor of Azarbaijan. He moderated his 
ambition and was content with that governorship until 
his death in A.H. 607 (A.D. 1210). Meanwhile, as 
referred to previously, Toghrel was killed in A.H. 590 
(A.D. 1194) by Qotlogh with the help of the army of 
Takesh Kharazm Shah. Qotlogh Inanej, as mentioned 
before, was the grandson of the slave Ildegez whom 
Mas’ud, the Saljuq ruler of Erak, promoted to the rank of 
Atabek and Premier. Takesh was a descendant of the 
Turkish slave, Anushtegin, who rose to the dignity of a 
cup-bearer to the Great Saljuq, Malek Shah, and was 
promoted by him to the governorship of Kharazm. 
The last of the Saljuq rulers of Persia was, therefore, 
killed by a descendant of one of the slaves of the Saljuqs, 
and their empire was absorbed by a descendant of another 
slave of a king of the same dynasty. 


THE EATEMID CALIPHS OF EGYPT 
The Eatemid Caliphs who ruled in Egypt during the 
life of Nezami and who, although far away from both 
Qom and Ganjeh, influenced the life of the people of these 
districts to a degree not less than the immediate political 
upheavals which were constantly changing the destinies 
of kingdoms and empires, were the following : 

Zafer Abol Mansur Esma’il, A.H. 544-49 (A.D. 

1149-54), 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


Fa’ez Abol Qasem Isa, A.H. 549-55 (A.D. 1154-60), 

Azed Abu Mohammad Abdollah. A.H. 555-67 (A.D. 

1160-71). 

The Fatemid Caliphs of Egypt were originally de¬ 
scended from Abdollah, the son of Meimun, an oculist 
of Ahvaz and a Persian by race. Seeing his country ruled 
by the Caliphs of Baghdad, who were of alien race, he 
claimed that he was himself, descended from Fatemeh, 
the daughter of the Prophet, and therefore, claiming to 
be a direct descendant of the Prophet, he pretended to 
be the right Commander of the Faithful. He crossed 
over to Egypt and in a very short time spread his doc¬ 
trine there. His descendants became afterwards the 
mighty Fatemid Caliphs who ruled in Egypt over two and 
a half centuries, and who absorbed many parts of the 
empire of the Abbasid Caliphs of Baghdad. The last of 
the Fatemid Caliphs was supplanted by Salahod-Din, the 
celebrated Saladin, in A.H. 567 (A.D. 1171). 

The Fatemid Caliphs ruled over practically the whole 
of North Africa, Egypt, and southern Syria and Aleppo. 
Their most serious wars were with the Crusaders, to 
whom they lost Sicily, Malta, Mahdiyeh, and Qeirovan. 
The glory and splendour of the court of the Fatemid 
Caliphs, their administration of justice, the immuni ty 
of their subjects from exploitation, the wealth and 
commerce of their people, as portrayed by the Persian 
Esma’ili poet and traveller, Naser-e Khosrou, are too well 
known to require repetition here. During the Caliphate 
of Azed, the last Fatemid Caliph, the Crusaders invaded 
Egypt. The Moslems, fearing defeat, made peace with 
them, and agreed to pay them a million dinars on 
condition that they evacuated Egypt. The deputies of 
the Crusaders entered Cairo to receive the agreed sum. 
Meanwhile Azed had recovered from his fright and had 
sent a message to Nurod-Din Mahmud, the Zangid ruler of 
Syria, for help. Nurod-Din sent an army of eighty 
thousand men to their help, under the command of 




THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 83 


Asadod-Din Shir Kuh. When the Crusaders heard of 
the approach of the army of Shir Kuh, they left Egypt. 
In this manner on two further occasions, the Crusaders 
invaded Egypt, and twice again Shir Kuh came to the 
help of the Moslems and drove the invaders out. On 
the third occasion, in A.H. 564 (A.D. 1168), he entered 
Cairo and took into his own hands all the important affairs 
of the Empire. The Caliph Azed sent him a robe of 
honour and a covenant written by his own hand. The 
Prime Minister of Azed was Shapur, with whom the 
Caliph was displeased. Shir Kuh put the Prime Minister 
to death and sent his head to the Caliph and himself 
became the Prime Minister. He held that office for 
sixty-five days, after which he died. The Caliph made 
the nephew of Shir Kuh, Salahod-Din Yusof, the son 
of Najmod-Din Aiyub, i.e. Saladin, successor to Shir 
Kuh. Saladin, in a short time, became powerful and 
independent, and the Caliph Azed was like a puppet 
in his hands. Nurod-Din, the Zangid ruler of Syria, 
sent a message to Saladin, asking him to remove Azed 
from the Caliphate, to omit his name from the Khotbeh 
and to substitute the name of the Abbasid Caliph Mostazi, 
which he did after the request had been repeated. In 
A.H. 567 (A.D. 1171), therefore, when Azed was dying, 
Saladin ordered that the Khotbeh should be read in the 
name of the Abbasid Caliph. Azed died before hearing 
this news, and thus the Eatemid Caliphate of Egypt came 
to an end. 

At that time Nezami was twenty-six years of age, and 
as he was an orthodox Moslem, we can well imagine the 
feeling of satisfaction and joy he must have had at the 
disappearance of the great schismatic rivals of the Caliphs 
of Baghdad. 




84 THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


THE ASSASSINS 

The Assassins, or the Esma’ilis of Persia are the 
Eastern branch of the Eatemid Caliphs of Egypt. 

The name Assassin was originally Hashishin, mean¬ 
ing those who partook of hashish, the juice of Indian 
hemp. The Esma’ilis partook of hashish, and as the 
most powerful instrument for the progress of their pro¬ 
paganda was the assassination of everyone who was 
thought to be the slightest hindrance to the advancement 
of their creed, the Crusaders, pronouncing the word 
Assassins instead of Hashishin, brought it to Europe as 
a designation for murderers. 

When Nezami was born, Mohammad, the son of 
Bozorg Omid, was ruling as the leader of the Assassins 
in the great fortress of Alamut, near Hamedan. This 
Mohammad, true to the precepts of his predecessors^ 
caused the assassination of a great number of rulers and 
nobles, amongst whom may be mentioned the Abbasid 
Caliph Bashed and the great judge of Qohestan, where 
Nezami was born. When the news of the assassination 
of the Caliph reached Alamut, there was rejoicing for a 
week in that stronghold, and from that date onwards the 
Caliphs of Baghdad went in fear of their lives. Moham¬ 
mad, the son of Bozorg Omid, died in A.H. 555 (A.D. 
1160) and his son, Hasan, succeeded him. Besides 
being the ruler of Alamut and the leader of the Assassins, 
he made claim to the Emamate in A.H. 559 (A.D. 1164) 
in the presence of all his nobles and ministers at Alamut. 
He abrogated the laws of Islam and taught people in¬ 
wardly to think of God but outwardly to do whatever 
they desired. During his time heresy and disregard of 
the laws of Mohammad reached their zenith, and he was 
murdered in A.H. 561 (A.D. 1166). His son, Mohammad, 
succeeded him in Alamut. He preached the precepts of 
his father to the utmost limit and sent his devotees to 
every part of the Mohammadan world for the assassina.- 





THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 85 


tion of the rulers and nobles who were regarded as hostile 
to the Esma’ili doctrines. 

His elder son, Jalalod-Din Hasan, was opposed to 
his father’s religious ideas, consequently there was enmity 
between the two, and it is said that the son poisoned 
his father in A.H. 607 (A.D. 1210), i.e. about three 
years after the death of Nezami. 

THE GHAZNAVID EMPIRE 

At the time of the birth of Nezami, the great Empire 
of the Ghaznavids was already on the decline. Sanjar 
had marched on Ghaznin, defeated Arsalan Shah s 
army, entered Ghaznin, taken possession of the Ghaz¬ 
navid treasures, seated his own nephew, Bahram Shah, 
the step-brother of Arsalan Shah, the son of Mas ud, on 
the throne, and returned to Khorasan. When Arsalan 
Shah heard of the departure of Sanjar, he collected a 
large army from India and returned to Ghaznin to fight 
against his step-brother. Bahram Shah, not having 
enough power to resist his brother, Arsalan Shah, fled. 
Then once more, with the help of Sanjar, he advanced 
on Ghaznin; Arsalan Shah fled again. The army of 
Sanjar pursued and captured him and brought him to Bah¬ 
ram Shah, who put him to death in A.H. 512 (A.D. 1118). 
During his reign, Bahram Shah invaded India several 
times. He is important for our purpose, because Nezami, 
in dedicating his Makhzanol Asrar to his patron Bahram 
Shah, mentions two books, written by two renowned 
poets, both dedicated to two Bahram Shahs. One of 
these was this Ghaznavid ruler, the patron of Sana’i, 
and the other his own patron, the ruling prince of Arran. 
At the end of the reign of Bahram Shah, the Ghurid king, 
Ala’od-Din Hosein, invaded the Ghaznavid territory and 
occupied Ghaznin. Bahram Shah fled to India; the 
Ghurid king made his own brother governor of Ghaznin 
and returned to his own territory. After his departure, 






86 


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


Bahrain Shah, with a large army which he had collected 
from India, returned and occupied Ghaznin and captured 
the brother of the Ghurid king. 

When Ala’od-Din heard this news, he proceeded again 
towards Ghaznin, but before he reached that city in A.H. 
547 (A.D. 1152), Bahrain Shah died. After his death, his 
son, Khosrou Shah, was placed on the throne, but as 
the army of Ala’od-Din was approaching the city, he fled 
to Lahore. Ala’od-Din, the Ghurid ruler entered Ghaz¬ 
nin and perpetrated barbarous and savage atrocities on the 
inhabitants, appointed Gheyasod-Din and Shoja’od-Din, 
his two nephews, governors of the Ghazna.vid territory’ 
and returned to Ghur. His two nephews succeeded at 
length in capturing Khosrou Shah, whom they imprisoned 
in a fortress, where he died in A.H. 555 (A.D. 1160). 

When Khosrou Shah had fled from Ghaznin to Lahore, 
he had become king there, and after his death his son,’ 
Khosrou Malek, succeeded him. In A.H. 583 (A.D. 1187) 
Gheyasod-Din, the nephew of Ala’od-Din, invaded India, 
entered Lahore, captured Khosrou Malek, sent him to 
Ghaznin, and imprisoned him there. After that, the 
Ghurids captured and put to death any descendants of 
the Ghaznavid whom they could lay hands on. Thus 
the Ghaznavid rule came to an end, not only in Persia 
but also in India. The Ghurid kings were descendants 
of a certain Hosein, who was a servant of the Ghaznavid 
Sultan Ebrahim. Sultan Mas’ud of Ghazneh, the son 
of Ebrahim, made this Hosein governor of the province 
of Ghur. In time Hosein became independent, and his 
descendants later, as we have just seen, brought that 
great empire to an end. This is one more instance of 
how the slaves and servants of great dynasties destroyed 
and absorbed those very same dynasties which had raised 
them from the lowest degree of servitude to the highest 
positions in the empire. 

In concluding the life and times of Nezami, it is 
interesting to relate a story which we find in many 






THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 87 

biographies, including the Tazkeratosh Sho’ara of 
Doulat Shah, the Atash Kadeh of Lotf Ali Beg, and the 
Mer’atol Kheyal of Shir Khan. It shows the high esteem 
in which Nezami was held in the hearts of his countrymen. 
It is stated there that King Qezel Arsalan was desirous 
of Nezami’s company. He sent a messenger to ask him 
to attend his court, but the royal messenger was told that 
the poet was living a life of retirement, solitude, and devo¬ 
tion to God, and did not associate with kings and rulers. 
Qezel Arsalan, in order to test the poet, paid him a visit. 
The poet, through divine guidance and his power to per¬ 
form miracles, understood the object of the king’s visit. 
He caused a vision from the hidden world to appear 
before the eyes of the king, as soon as he entered the 
presence of Nezami. He saw there the poet seated on 
a most magnificent throne bejewelled with most beau¬ 
tiful precious stones. There were innumerable courtiers, 
attendants, and bodyguards dressed in gorgeous clothes, 
with belts studded with gems, standing before him. 
When the monarch saw the pomp and splendour of that 
court, he was stricken with awe and went forward to 
kiss Nezami’s foot. At that moment the poet transformed 
himself from the invisible world. The king saw an 
old and humble man sitting upon a piece of felt at the 
mouth of a cave and having before him a book, a pen, 
an inkstand, and a rosary. The king humbly kissed the 
hand of the poet and, from that time onward, had a great 
belief in him. Nezami also had regard for the king 
and did at times visit his court. 







Oj£- Ojp? 

jfj ltj* j - 5 •‘lh *r 

AS I HAVE A TREASURE LIKE 
MAKHZANOL ASRAR, WHY SHOULD I 
TROUBLE ABOUT ROMANCES? 




MAKHZANOL ASRAR 

THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 

(2) 1. In the Name of God, the most Merciful and 
Compassionate is the key to the door of the treasury 
of the wise. 

2. The Name of God is the beginning of thought and 
the end of speech. Complete thy thought and speech 
in His Name. 

3. Existent before all creation, more eternal than all 
eternities, 

4. Ancient Lord of the eternal universe, Decorator 
of the neck of the Pen with a necklace, 

5. Revealer of the secrets of the mysterious heaven, 
secret Goal of those who know the divine mysteries, 

(3) 6. Source of every spring of liberality, Author of all 
existence, 

7. He adorns the mountain with rubies, giving verdure 
to the earth and a ripple to water. 

8. Guide to those who cultivate their souls, Source 
of light to those who partake of His daily bread, 

9. He strings the fine thread of intellect with pearls 
and is the sight of the blind eye of reason. 

10. He marks the brow of the saint. He crowns the 
kings of this world. 

11. Destroyer of well matured plans, He it is who 
accepts excuses for shortcoming. 






90 


MAKHZANOL ASKAR 


12. Protector of those who cry aloud in fear, Source 
of the counsel of the spiritually minded, 

13. Beginning and end of Existence and Attributes, 
Creator and Destroyer of creation, 

14. Compared with His Majesty which is greater 
than both worlds, our time from its beginning to its end 
is but an instant. 

15. Who but God in this eternal universe could say : 
“ Whose is the Empire? ” 

16. He was, when all that is high and low was not; 
He will be, when all that exists has come to an end. 

17. Those who were nourished by eternal knowledge, 
have not solved this difficult problem. 

18. Oh, what an ocean is His eternal knowledge ! 
Oh, what a desert is His eternal kingdom ! 

19. His eternity has no beginning; neither has it 
any end. 

20. The celestial maidens in the garden of thy form 
come from Him; the light of the sight of thine eyes 
comes from Him. 

21. The struggle of every living being is to do service 
to His Godhead. 

22. His Existence alone has permanence; He is 
sanctified who is not transient. 

23. Gratitude is due to Him from the sun and the 
mountains for His thousand bounties to them. 

24. When His munificence was veiled by light, the 
thorn was far from the rose and the cane from sweetness. 

25. When by His liberality He created generosity, 
existence was freed from the bondage of non-existence. 

26. For the sake of these few ruined villages, the work 
of heaven was entangled. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


91 


27. Until He had untied this knot which transcends 
the power of thought, the tresses of the night were not 
freed from the grasp of the day. 

28. When He scattered the pearls of the necklace 
of heaven, He combed the dust of night from the tresses 
of non-existence. 

29. He made seven knots on the girdle of the earth, 
when He made the spheres of heaven. 

30. He made a robe for the sun and a cloak for the 
moon from this white cloth of day and this black cloth 
of night. 

31. He loosened drops of rain from the heart of the 
sea; He drew the spring of life from the lips of heaven. 

32. He poured the wine of dawn into the dark clay; 
He poured a draught of that wine into the mouth of the 
stone. 

33. He made the lustre of the pearl and the richness 
of the ruby from the fire and water which He mingled 
together. 

34. He placed the blood of the heart of the earth, 
shed on account of the severity of the wind, in the heart 
of the red ruby. 

35. He made the garden of generosity as beautiful 
as the sky; He made the fame of the nightingale of 
speech reach to heaven. 

36. He gave sweet dates to the palm tree of speech; 
He gave the oyster shell of the ear to the pearl of speech. 

37. He veiled sleep. He clothed the water with the 
garment of life. 

38. He spread the tresses of the earth on the shoulders 
of the world. He painted the mole of sin upon the 
face of Adam. 



92 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


39. He cleansed dishonour from the face of gold. 
He washed the blood from the rose with the spring cloud. 

40. He lightened the darkness of the skies by the 
stars. He entrusted the soul of the morning breeze to 
sweet herbs. 

41. He placed the blood of the world in the heart 
of the clay. He placed the pulse of wisdom in the beat 
of the heart. 

42. He set laughter on the lips to destroy grief. He 
seated Venus at the banquet of night’s minstrelsy. 

43. The perfume of the night is diffused by His 
musk-sellers. The new moon wears the ring of His 
servitude. 

44. A stone thrown from His royal tent broke the 
head of soaring eloquence. 

45. Halting imagination travelled far and wide and 
returned from His door empty-handed. 

46. The mind travelled far but did not find Him ; 
the eye searched far and wide but found none like Him. 

47. Reason entered, saying : “ I have sought Him.” 
This was presumption; I chastised it. 

48. Those drawn by the point of His compass join 
us in our search of Him. 

49. The birds on the Tree of Paradise soar towards 
Him; those who walk in heaven knock also at the same 
door. 

50. As for heaven, it wears the collar of His servi¬ 
tude, and as for the heart of the earth, it is full of love 
of Him. 

51. Unity lives by His omnipotent name; eternity 
is the pillar of the throne of His empire. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


93 


52. The sighs of the weary are His favoured guests; 
His swift messengers are the feet of captives. 

53. The heart which is purer than the soul, lays claim 
to being the dust of His threshold. 

54. Compared with a rose of the garden, grown from 
the seed on the dust of His threshold, Eram is but an 
idle tale. 

55. The dust of Nezami which exists by His aid, is 
soil for the seed of His unity. 

EIEST PEAYEB 

On punishment and the wrath of God 

56. Oh God! Erom Thee all existence has sprung; 
through Thee the impotent dust is strong. 

57. Creation rests under Thy banner ; we live through 
Thee, as Thou livest by Thine own Essence. 

58. Thy Being has neither form nor body; Thou 
resembles! none, and none resembles Thee. 

59. Thou art unchangeable, and Thou didst not and 
wilt not die. 

60. We are all transient; eternity belongs to Thee 
alone. The high and sacred empire is Thine. 

61. The earth is fixed by Thy command. Thou makest 
the azure vault without pillars. 

62. Who but Thee gave the curve of the polo-stick 
to heaven? Who but Thee gave to the cauldron of the 
body the salt of life? 

63. When Thy eternity calls on the chequer-board 
of night and day, who but Thee can say : “I am the 
Lord?” 

(8) 64. Love could no longer endure the attraction of 

Thy name, if peace came not from Thee. 




94 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


65. When Thy generosity took the road of the world, 
the earth bore a heavy load. 

66. The world would have been ruptured, if it had 
not been born from the loins of Thy munificence. 

67. The necklace of devotion is threaded by Thee; 
worship save of Thee is unlawful. 

68. May he be silent who does not speak of Thee; 
may all be forgotten which is not in remembrance of 
Thee. 

69. The cup-bearer of the night begs for Thy cup; 
the bird of dawn prays to Thy name. 

70. Draw back the curtain and come out alone; 
even if I were that veil, rend it. 

71. Show heaven its impotence; loosen the knots 
of the earth. 

72. Erase the signs of the universe ; change the forms 
of matter. 

73. Give back the speech of the tongue to the Pen; 
discharge the debt of the earth to non-existence. 

74. Delay the progress of tyrants; remove selfish 
desires from the seekers of jewels. 

75. Break asunder this universe of six dimensions; 
pull down the nine-tiered pulpit of heaven. 

76. Throw down the casket of the moon upon the 
terrestrial globe; throw the stone of Saturn at the cup 
of Venus. 

77. Scatter this necklace which illuminates the night; 
break the wings of the bird of night and day. 

78. Scrape this layer of clay off the earth, and say 
to this brick of the earth : “ Cease to be.” 

79. Wipe the dust of night from the brow of the 
universe; say to Jupiter: ‘‘Fall,” and to Leo: ‘‘Do 
not rise.” 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


95 


ft 


ft 



80. How long wilt Thou allow this new scheme of 
the universe to continue? Bring back a veil of the old 
order. 

81. Destroy the scheme and free the neck of heaven 
from the chain of motion and immobility. 

82. Pour water upon the fire of injustice; lower pride 
to the dust. 

83. Burn the tables of the astronomers; close the 
eyes of the Sun-worshippers. 

84. Deprive this constellation of the orb of the moon; 
draw back this curtain from these speculations, 

85. So that they may testify to Thy divinity and 
confess their own non-existence. 


86. The birds gird their loins, saying : “We are 
Thy slaves roses are filled -with life, saying: “ We 
live by Thee.’’ 

(10) 87. There is no blood money for him whom Thou 

killest, and there is no fine for whomsoever Thou hangest. 

88. Thou makest the stage of the journey by night 
to be long; Thou bringest back the sun which has gone 
down. 


89. Although Thou mayest be angry with many, none 
can complain. 

90. Thou hast given the light of reason to the soul; 
Thou hast imparted the savour of the heart to the tongue. 

91. From Thee heaven received its motion, the fixed 
star its immobility. The garden of existence received 
the water of life from Thee. 


92. The airs and graces of the wild rose come not 
from the morning breeze, but from the dust of Thy 
feet, its collyrium. 

93. The calyx of the lily. Thy cup, has tongue only 
for Thy praise. 

E 







96 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


94. Nezami, the slave, who sings the song of Thy 
unity, is in both worlds the dust of Thy road. 

95. Make his mind prosperous by the knowledge of 
Thee; free his neck from the snare of sorrow. 

SECOND PRAYER 
On the bounty and forgiveness of God 

96. Oh God ! Thou wast from the beginning when 
we were not; Thou wilt live eternally and we shall perish. 

97. The universe obeys Thine order; the shoulder of 
heaven carries Thy saddle cloth. 

98. We are the homeless beggars at Thy door; we 
have the ring of Thy servitude in our ears. 

99. We bear Thy brand, and kings do not accept 
the branded dog for the chase. 

( 11 ) 100. Thou wilt accept us, because we are from Thy 

garden. We are the dove which wears the collar of Thy 
servitude and the dog which bears Thy brand. 

101. W e do not expect aid from any helper; we have 
no other support but Thee. 

102. All these hopes and fears are for Thy sake; 
therefore forgive us, oh generous One. 

103. Help us, because we have no helper. If Thou 
dost drive us away, to whom shall we turn ? 

104. What is this tongue, and what is this speech? 
Speech and silence are both to be regretted. 

105. What an immensity between my insignificance 
and the praise of God’s glory ! 

106. How dared this soul traverse this sea? How 
dared this heart drink from this spring? 

107. We are helpless as those who are dumb, there¬ 
fore we repeat : “ He who knows God.” 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


9T 


108. Since I am ashamed of my useless speech, for¬ 
give me by Thy bounty. 

109. Although we come before Thee in our destitu¬ 
tion, yet we come hoping in Thee, oh God! 

110. Befriend us, oh Helper of the sorrowful! Help 
us, oh Helper of the helpless! 

111. The caravan has passed, see how far we lag 
behind. Oh Thou, our Helper, look on our helplessness I 

112. With whom shall we take refuge? Thou art 
without equal. To whom shall we fly? Thou art our 
Helper. 

113. We will not make a shrine except of Thy door; 
who will cherish us, if Thou wilt not? 

114. Who begs as we do? Who laments more than 
w'e? 

115. Forgive our sins, because we pray to Thee ; help 
us, because we take refuge in Thee. 

116. Oh God, Nezami’s name is honoured in Thee; 
his greatness comes from serving Thee. 

117. Send the blessing of praise to his tongue; give 
his soul knowledge of Thee. 


In praise of the Holy Prophet, the prayers of God be 
upon him and upon his family 

(12) 118. When Alef was drawn on the First Tablet, 

it was fixed as a beading to the door of Ahmad. 

119. When Alef gave the empire to the ring of Ha, 
it gave that same Ha, a collar from Dal and a belt from 
Mim, 

120. Therefore it received from Mim and Dal the 
circle of the empire and the line of perfection. 





98 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


121. Under this dome of turquoise bricks, there grew 
a fresh tangerine tree from the garden of Paradise. 

122. It is the nature of a tangerine tree that in the 
world it should first bring forth fruit and then blossom. 

123. When “ I was a Prophet ” carried the banner 
forward, it entrusted the completion of prophetship to 
Mohammad. 

* 

124. The moon is the bezel of emerald; its gem is 
the seal of Mohammad. 

125. The ear of the world carries the Mim of Ins 
bondage; the two worlds themselves submit to him. 

126. He is the great Surveyor, and the Anointed is 
his slave; they are both called messengers of good tidings. 

( 13 ) 12/. He is illiterate, but speaks with eloquence from 

the Alef of Adam to the Mim of the Messiah. 

128. He is straight like Alef in his promise and 
fidelity. He is the beginning and the end of the prophets. 

129. He is the most brilliant centre of the compass 
of Be thou,” the centre of the all inclusive circle of 
speech. 

130. The whole world of literature is but an empty 
sound compared with his speech, and the heavens are a 
girdle for his waist. 

131. Although he has no pride, yet he did not bow 
down to the world. 

132. The veiled ones of heaven are the doorkeepers 
of his sanctuary. Chastity itself is nurtured by him, 

133. His dust cleanses sin from the eyes. His de¬ 
parture wrests revenue from Mecca. 

134. His silence is heart-ravishing speech; his friend¬ 
ship is a virtue which destroys faults. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


99 


135. To quell the disturbance by him is the heart’s 
delight, also there can be no escape from the madness 
of his love. 

136. He was the leader of all and the beginning of 
all good. He was the great fixed star, but moved swiftly. 

137. In his heart the divine candle was lit; he learnt 
the lesson of eternity from the beginning to the end. 

138. The source of the sun, dependent on him, is but 
half the crescent moon of the night of his Ascent to 
Heaven. 

139. He was the crowned monarch of the Night of 
Ascension; he enthroned kings with belts and crowns. 

140. He gave ease to weary breath; he shod the 
heavenly steed which carried him by night. 

(14) 141. The riders of speech stood motionless ready with 

their steeds, expecting his return. 

142. When the chequered steed ceased to gallop, 
Nezami w r as appointed as its groom. 

On the Ascension 

143. One midnight when the sun set the world-illumi¬ 
nating torch in motion, 

144. The eyes of the nine heavens were his retinue ; 
Venus and the moon carried his torch. 

145. He left the seven spheres, the four quarters, and 
the six dimensions in the secret chamber of creation. 

146. Hay bade farewell to his footsteps; night was in 
ecstasy at his advent. 

147. The eyes of the strangers were heavy with sleep, 
when he turned quickly away from sleep. 

148. With the cage of the body, the bird of his heart 
flew away from this prison to its own resting-place. 







100 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


149. The birds, namely, the angels, remained behind 
helpless. Heaven threw down its cloak. 

150. His body was lighter than the heart; his divine 
bird flew with the cage. 

151. As he moved on step by step, he was seized and 
carried further and further towards divine bliss. 

(15) 152. Since both worlds had their eyes on him, they 
bowed their heads adoring him. 

153. His feet carried him hundreds of stages as one 
stage, because he had the highest honour. 

154. His exalted steed threw down its saddle-cloth 
upon the shoulder of all existence. 

155. The sea of the earth became a mine and he its 
pearl. The heaven bore him as its crown. 

156. Taurus took the jewels of that dark perfumed 
night from the Bull of the earth. 

157. He took the crown from Cancer and the belt 
from Orion as gifts for that journey. 

158. The Virgo which received fresh hyacinth from 
him, threw the cluster at Leo. 

159. Venus, who weighs the night, held Libra in 
her hand to estimate the honour of his night. 

160. Libra bowed down to the glory of that night, 
because she had not weights enough in her scales to 
weigh its dignity. 

(16) 161. His healing breath poured balm on the tail of 
this Scorpion of the azure realm. 

162. When he hit the target with the arrow from the 
bow, the poison left the kid which was on his table. 

163. He became Joseph of the bucket like the sun; 
he became Jonah of the fish like the Water bucket. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


101 


164. When he set the throne of the Pleiades on the 
sign Aries, the army of flowers pitched its tents on the 
plain. 

165. The pleasure house of the earth was decked 
with the colours of spring by the rose of that exalted 
garden of Paradise. 

166. lie recited the ten verses of courtesy from the 
Koran ; he asked pardon of the prophets for his approach. 

167. His footsteps rent the curtain of the stars. The 
shoulders of the angels bore his banner. 

168. Midnight was filled with the musk of his lips. 
The crescent moon was the shoe cast by his steed. 

169. The canter of Boraq was like lightning in the 
dark night of that event. 

(17) 170. Like a partridge, the falcon flew dove-like with 

the glory of the Phoenix. 

171. The Tree of Paradise touched the front of his 
robe. High heaven laid hands on his skirt. 

172. The night turned into day; lo, what a wonderful 
day ! The rose turned into cypress ; lo, what a wonderful 
spring! 

173. Amongst all the roses and narcissi of that garden, 
his narcissus had the collyrium which takes away false 
vision. 

174. He was passed on like a rose from hand to hand 
up this turquoise-carpeted stair, till he reached the foot 
of the Throne. 

175. His fellow travellers threw down their shields; 
they broke their pinions and shed their feathers. 

176. He in amazement, like the strangers on the road, 
knocked at the door of that Threshold. 




102 


MAKHZANOL A SE AR 


177. The veiled angels, His doorkeepers, with one 
accord helped him down from his litter. 

178. He went on that road which must be travelled 
alone; one foot knew not where the other would tread. 

179. All but him remained on the Threshold of that 
Mystery; even he lost consciousness of himself. 

180. His foot was the crown of existence ; the heavens 
had need of that provender. 

181. When he drew his pen through all words, he 
raised his banner above the heavens. 

182. The lord of life urged the body along the road, 
so long as his physical body drew the breath of life. 

183. When the journey to heaven ended, the heart 
and the soul were charged with their own work. 

184. The body hastened to the place of its origin. 
Vision became such that imagination could not follow it. 

185. The eyes which are fit to look upon the Eternal 
Light will not lower themselves to vain thoughts. 

186. The road of Eternity was before his feet. The 
curtain of physical creation was withdrawn. 

187. When he travelled the endless road, he raised 
his head above the veil of nature. 

188. His high spirits reached a stage beyond time and 
space through the great enlightenment of his heart. 

189. Jealousy laid hold on him from behind that 
curtain; at the same time bewilderment held him back. 

190. The hand of Union drew back the curtain from 
the glorious door of the house of Beauty. 

191. His feet transferred their function to his head. 
His soul gazed on that Vision. 

192. He ti’aveiled without the labour of his feet; he 
sprang, but was not allowed a resting place. 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


103 


193. As words leave the lips, so he departed from 
himself; therefore his greeting was accepted. 

194. He saw the sign of that Light which knows no 
decline, with eyes which were beyond imagination. 

195. The vision of Him is free from accident and 
matter, because He is beyond accident and matter. 

(19) 196. He saw God as the Absolute, and this is accept¬ 

able ; God can be seen. 

197. One must not deny that he saw with his eyes; 
whoso does not admit his vision is blind. 

198. The Prophet saw Him, not with a. different eye, 
but with this physical eye. 

199. The vision of that curtain was not spacial; the 
journey on that road was timeless. 

200. Whoso was permitted to see behind that curtain, 
went on the way w T hich is not a road. 

201. He is, but not in any place ; He who is bound by 
space is not God. 

202. Do not deny His permanence; it is blasphemy. 
Do not limit Him to space; it is ignorance. 

203. He drank the wine which God had prepared ; 
he poured a draught of that wine into our clay. 

204. Eternal Grace was the companion of his soul. 
Divine Compassion was the cherisher; he was the 
cherished. 

205. His lips were adorned with a sweet smile; he 
asked favours for his people. 

206. His spirit was enriched by that Treasure; all 
his aims were realised. 

207. He was strengthened by that Audience; he 
faced the toils of this world. 





104 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


208. He returned from that journey which demands 
love. He went and came back in an instant of time. 

209. Oh thou, whose word is a seal on our tongue! 
Thy scent is the elixir of our life. 

210. Complete the cycle of generosity ; entrust the 
completion of speech to Nezami. 


The first eulogy (to the Prophet) 

(20) 211. The canopy of the nine thrones of the seven 
stars, the end and the ornament of the prophets, 

212. Ahmad, the Prophet, the dust of whose feet is 
wisdom, has both worlds tied to his saddle strap. 

213. Fairest hyacinth in the garden of glory, most 
precious jewel of the sea of mystery, 

214. His tresses are Virgo which shines by day; his 
essence gives brightness to the sun. 

215. His sweet lips did not laugh aloud, that his 
pearls may not destroy the lustre of the shell. 

216. Why did the stone break his pearl, since his 
essence did not wound even the stony hearts? 

217. The stone of his accuser broke a pearl in his 
casket. 

218. The pearl was freed from the narrow casket; 
it is not strange that stones should produce gems. 

219. Av, because the heard was of the stone, it had 
the dryness of melancholia. 

220. How could this stone rejoice, if it were not a 
breaker of pearls and a grinder of rubies? 

(21) 221. Had the stone enough silver to pay compensa¬ 
tion, that it came and wounded that small mouth? 



THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


105 


222. The gems, produced from stones, are all com¬ 
pensation for his wounded lip. 

223. How could the gem, mined from the earth, 
compensate for the pearl of his tooth? 

224. In compensation for his tooth, victory obeyed 
him with the utmost effort and sincerity. 

225. When he rinsed his mouth with the bloody 
water of the stone, he rightly took the name Munificence. 

226. He took hold of the tooth and gave it gladly as 
a, thanksgiving and surrendered it. 

227. He had no desire of possession, because in both 
worlds he needed nothing. 

228. In the ranks of his army on the field of battle, 
his hand was the standard and his tongue the dagger. 

229. His dagger sacrificed the tooth; a dagger like a 
saw is useless. 

230. What w T as the purpose of these troubles? That 
mankind might gaze upon his generosity and leave the 
thorn and take the fruit from his flower. 

(22) 231. The garden is full of roses ; w T hy speak of thorns? 

The string is threaded with beads; why speak of the tail 
of the serpent? 

232. Abandon the crow for the tail of the peacock; 
remain in the garden with the song of the nightingale. 

233. The poetic talent of Nezami, which through him 
is like a rose, is a sweetly melodious nightingale on his 
rose. 


The second eulogy (to the Prophet) 

234 . 0 thou, whose body is purer than the pure soul! 

Thy soul is nourished by May my soul be sacrificed to 
thee. 




106 MAKHZANOL ASRAR 

235. Thou art the centre of the circle of mercy; thou 
art the destroyer of the dot of zahmat. 

236. Thou art the moon of the Arabian travellers; 
thou art the king of the kings of Iran. 

237. They seek the path by thee, and thou dost not 
guide. Thou art thyself the lord of the village; yet thou 
art not in the village. 

238. When the great like thee go on a journey, they 
do not themselves alone consume the provision for all. 

239. What hast thou brought back for us from that 
table at which thou hast partaken of fresh dates? 

240. Open thy mouth, that all may partake of sweet¬ 
meats and take fresh dates from the water of thy mouth. 

241. Oh thou, whose dark tresses are the day of sal¬ 
vation, the fire of the love of thee is the water of life. 

242. Reason is distracted for love of thy face; thy 
tresses are the chains of the maniacs. 

243. The heavens are a slave to thy girdle. The 
dawn, compared with the sun of thy face, is but a smile. 

(23) 244. The impure were cleansed of vice by thee. The 

navel of the earth obtained its musk-bladder from thee. 

245. That land is loaded with musk by thy musk- 
scented dust. 

246. Thy dust is better than the wind of Solomon ; 
how should I compare it with paradise? It is better 
than the Guardian Angel of paradise. 

247. The Ka’beh, the altar of thy devotions, thirsts 
for a draught of the rose water of thine elixir. 

248. The world holds thy crown and thy throne; thy 
throne is the earth, and thy crown is the heavens. 

249. Thou, who art the light of the great, hast no 
shadow; thou art thyself the shadow of the light of God. 


THE TBEASOEY OF MYSTEEIES 


107 


250. The four standards are the pillars of Islam; the 
five prayers are the insignia of empire. 

251. The dust of the abject has become a garden 
through thee. The eyes of strangers have their sight 
from thee. 

252. Since thy foot has trodden in the dark night 
upon the crown of the revolving heaven, 

253. Thou hast filled its lap with gold and pearls and 
made the buttons of its robe of small gold bricks. 

254. In the oyster shell of the dawn, the morning 
breeze mixes the ambergris of thy perfume with the 
hands of purity, 

(24) 255. Therefore the army of ambergris lowered its 

standard wherever the morning breezes blew. 

256. If thou gavest the perfume which thy ringlets 
diffuse for the price of the two worlds, thou wouldst give 
it cheaply. 

257. The Tree of Heaven is a ribbon decorating thy 
robe; the heavenly Throne is an usher in thy court. 

258. When the light of thy soul shines in the morning, 
that Throne will be but a mote in that sunshine. 

259. If from the Dawn of Eternity a mirror had not 
reflected thy light, how could thy light have fallen, 
upon the dust of the earth? 

260. Oh thou, who art both worlds, why art thou 
under the earth ? Thou art not an earthly treasure ; 
why art thou bound to the dust? 

261. It is necessary to entrust the treasure to the 
dust, so long as thou art in the dust, oh pure treasure. 

262. Thy poverty is a ruin sufficient for thy treasure. 
Thy shadow is a moth sufficient for thy candle. 







108 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


263. The curved heaven is the target of thy prayers, 
the wheel of its Aquarius is the rope of thy well. 

264. These two revolving black and white attendants 
are messengers on the road amongst thy train. 

265 Reason seeks a cure ; thou art its physician. The 
moon is the traveller; thou art her object of wonder. 

266. Arise, turn the night of the expectant into day, 
and light the poetic mind of Nezami with joy. 


The third, eulogy (to the Prophet) 

267. 0 thou, who wearest a veil from Medina and 

one from Mecca, how much longer shall the sun be 


behind a cloud? 

268 If thou art a moon, show us a little of thy light; 
and if thou art a rose,lend us perfume from thy garden. 

269. Those who expect thee are dying of expectation. 
We are crying out against thee, oh help us. 

270. Come to Iran, do not stay in Arabia ; thou hast 
the light and dark steeds of night and day. 

271. Adorn the Empire and refresh the world. Fill 
both worlds with thy voice. 


272. Strike the die thyself, that the amirs may not 
strike it; read the proclamation thyself, that the pro¬ 
claimed may be silenced. 

273 The dust of thy feet gave a perfume to the faith ; 
the wind of discord arose and blew away that perfume. 


274. Withdraw authority from those who live at ease. 
Cleanse this pulpit from the impure. 

275 They live in the house of demons, drive them 
out; throw them into the granary of non-existence. 

276 Give them less provender, because they are 
gluttons; make the provender thine own, because they 
are plunderers. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


109 


•277. We are all body, come thou and be our soul; 
we are all ants, be thou our Solomon. 

278. On one side they make a breach in the faith, 
and on the other they lie in ambush. 

279. Thou art the leader, why is the caravan alone? 
Thou holdest the centre, why is the standard elsewhere? 

280. Either send an Ali into the ranks.of the battle; 
or send an Omar on to the road of Satan. 

281. Throw darkness upon the moon of Yaman. 
Raise thy head like a moon from the silk brocade. 

282. Be the helper of the captives; destroy the 
hypocrites. 

283. It is enough to sleep for live hundred and seventy 
years; the sun is high, hasten to the assembly. 

284. Arise and order the Angel of Death to blow out 
these few candles. 

285. Be the secret behind the curtain of mystery. 
We are all asleep, be thou awake. 

286. Stretch out thy hand and help us all against the 
calamities of this transitory house. 

287. Nothing that is thy pleasure is aught but good; 
none can hold thee responsible for thine actions. 

288. If thou lookest favourably upon us, thou wilt 
suffice for all our needs. 

289. Describe a circle with thy finger, so that what¬ 
ever exists may be bestowed upon thee. 

290. Who can intercede with thee on the day of 
judgment for forgiveness for a handful of dust? 

291. If thou drawest back the veil, both worlds will 
come to ecstasy. 





110 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


292. The brain of Nezami which seeks knowledge of 
thee, lives by the ambergris of thy perfume. 

.293. By. his prayers, bestow a perfume of fidelity 
upon him. Give to a beggar an empire like that of 
Pereidun. 

The fourth eulogy (to the Prophet) 

294. Oh thou, the jewel of the crown of the prophets, 
giving crowns to kings, 

295. All in this house, whoever they are, whether 
strangers or those of thy retinue, are dependent upon thee. 

296. Although the first couplet was dedicated to thy 
name ; yet for the sake of the rhyme thy name stood at 
the end. 

297. When the ordinance was made, this ruined 
world prospered through thee and through Adam. 

298. The material of which the house is built, is first 
water and then brick. 

299. Thou art Adam, and thou art Noah; nay, thou 
art better than both. Thou dost untie the one knot of 
them both. 

(28) 300. Tor Adam, who was defiled by that grain, 

repentance was a wholesome conserve of roses. 

301. In his garden, heartfelt repentance is thy per¬ 
fume ; his conserve of roses is the dust of thy street. 

302. When the heart partook of the sweet conserve 
of repentance from thee, the conserve of roses lost its 
sweetness. 

303. They made the ball of acceptance in eternity 
and threw it into the ranks on the plain of the heart. 

304. Unskilful Adam came forward to strike that ball 
with his own polo-stick, 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


111 


305. But when his polo-pony strayed after ears of 
corn, the ball remained behind, and he left the field. 

306. Noah, who reached the water of life parched 
with thirst, mistook the flood-water for the spring. 

307. When the turn of the child, Abraham, came, he 
went half-way and fell several times. 

308. Since the heart of David panted, his melody 
was fitting for this tenor and bass. 

309. Solomon, being stained with worldly empire, 
kept within the bounds of respect and did not seek this 
crown. 

( 29 ) 310. Joseph did not taste that water; he saw no sign 

but the rope and the bucket. 

311. Khezr turned back from this arid journey and 
found that his skirt was wet with the water of that spring. 

312. Moses saw his hands empty of this bowl; he 
broke the glass on the rock of Show me. 

313. Messiah did not intend to carry off this grain, 
because he was one of those accused in the house. 

314. Thou alone, like heaven, didst discard all and 
threwest thy shadow over this work. 

315. This book was sealed with thy name, and this 
proclamation came to an end with thine advent. 

316. Arise and ordain a better scheme than that of 
the revolving heaven. The heavens are idle; work thou. 

317. The horizon is the boundary of thy polo-ground ; 
the ball of the earth is in the curve of thy polo-stick. 

318. Until the dust of non-existence rises from anni¬ 
hilation, gallop and urge on thy steed, because the ground 
is thine. 





112 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


319. What is annihilation that it should take the 
water from thy bowl, or base non-existence that it should 
call on thy name? 

320. Bring non-existence to naught, annihilate anni¬ 
hilation. 

(30) 321. Oli thou, whose revelation is the speech of the 

speechless and balm for the affliction of the broken¬ 
hearted, 

322. Reason guided the ship of the soul through the 
sea of blood to the shore by thy laws. 

323. Thy threshold is the shrine of the nine heavens. 
The anemone of the six days of creation hangs in thy 
tresses. 

324. The empire will be entangled like thy locks, if 
one hair falls from thy head. 

325. Thou readest what is not written on parchment; 
without words thou knowest the inmost thoughts of the 
mind. 

326. Thy fingers wrote not, so that thy words may 
not be censured. 

327. The words of all men are subject to spoiling 
fingers; thy words are safe from the finger of any man. 

328. The dust of thy threshold is a sweet loaf; thy 
sweet lips are pistachio-nuts and jujube-fruits. 

329. In the desert of love, one morsel of thy sweet 
loaf is ample provision for the forty days’ journey of love. 

330. Thou art the fairest morning of my salvation. 
I am the dust of thy feet, because thou art my water 
of life. 

331. Thy dust is itself the garden of my soul. Thy 
garden is my soul and my world. 





t he treasury of mysteries 


113 


332. I put thy dust in the eyes of Nezami. I carry 
thy saddle-cloth on the shoulder of my servitude. 

333. I rise like the breeze and settle like dust on 
that garden which is pure as the soul, 

334. So that, when the elect anoint themselves with 
pure ambergris, they should make my dust the ambergris 
for their head. 


In praise of King Fakhrod-Din Bahrain Shah, 
the son of Davud 

335 4 I who in this circle which goes round the world 
am tied to the city like the centre of a point, 

' 336 . Have no opportunity to stretch my limbs in 
comfort. I have the shadow but not the glory of the 
Phoenix. 

337. My foot is sunk deep in this mire; my hand 
is on the saddle-strap of heaven. 

338. I lowered the crown of my head to beneath my 
feet, and I made a footstep of my knee-cap. 

339. The mirror of my heart on my knee-cap has 
become the great brightness of my face. 

340. I who occupied myself with this mirror, looked 
through the mirror of my physical eye 

341. To see from which mirror light may come, or 
from which fire water may reach me. 

342. When the eye of reason with just judgment 
quickly searched the world, 

343. It saw, of that essence which is in the spirit, 
one w T ho is the benefactor of the noble-minded, 

344. The mighty king whose fortune is victorious, the 
rose tree of this turquoise-coloured garden, 










114 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


345. A Khezr with the dignity of Alexander, of just 
judgment, the fixed star which determines the astrono¬ 
mical tables and explains the Almagest, 

346. He who is first in the purpose of existence, and 
for whose sake the Verse of Purpose was revealed, 

347. I he crowned king, owner of Solomon’s signet 
ring, the pride of the world, King Fakhrod-Din. 

348. His descent from David makes the name of 
Solomon befit his dignity. 

) 349. Through him the banner of Isaac is raised aloft. 

If he has an enemy, it is a,n Esma’ili. 

350. He is single-hearted; he holds the six dimen¬ 
sions and the seven spheres; Bahrain Shah is the centre 
of the nine circles. 

351. It is he who, because of his valour in the trial 
of strength, assigns a grave as a portion to Bahram-e Gur. 

352. King of kings in his great ability, famous in the 
world for his great wisdom, 

353. He sits on the throne of the Sultan and the 
Caliph and is the conqueror of Mesopotamia and the 
Abkhaz. 

354. More learned and just than all living, most be¬ 
loved and noblest of the munificent, 

355. His religion is the heaven and his kingdom the 
stars. His country is the oyster shell; the dust of his 
threshold is the pearl. 

356. He is the spring and the sea full of fish and of 
pearls, a peaceful spring and a full sea. 

357. The sun escapes like quicksilver because of his 
generous hand. 

358. The brilliant pure ruby on his belt laughs at 
the ruby on the belt of the sun. 






THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


115 


359. The calamity of this window of lapis lazuli struck 
him who laid hands on him. 

360. His bell deafens the ears of heaven; his breath 
breaks the mirror of the moon. 

361. A better beginning than happiness, a better end 
than the milk of human kindness, 

362. May his hand, which is the cup-bearer of the 
bowl of generosity, last for ever, because the bowl is 
everlasting. 


The discourse on audience (to the king) 

363. Oh thou, who art the glory of the essence of 
mankind, the sight of the eye of the world, 

{33) 364. The heaven which gives thee continual victory, 

is pregnant in its nine wombs with one secret of thine. 

365. The ears of the two fish above and beneath thee 
are the shell for the pearl of thy sword. 

366. The moon which draws its sword by night, has 
thrown down its shield before thy sword. 

367. The brightness of thy sword, which is like the 
waters of the Euphrates, has broken the jar of the water 
of life. 

368. He who sleeps during thy deluge, would be 
carried away by the flood, even if he were like Noah. 

369. Thy bowl gives understanding like that of Kei- 
kbosrou and Jamshid. Thy fane burns the moth of the 
sun. 

370. Be lion-hearted; thou conquerest the brave. I 
said lion in error; thou conquerest lions. 

371. Heaven fears thee more than it fears the lions 
of this thicket. 



116 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


372. Who on the field of battle would have such a 
high heart and such daring as to boast to thee of valour 
and courage? 

373. Thy hand of desire is absolute over all that exists 
under the blue sky. 

374. Thou hast given office to many, but the angels 
alone gave thee office. 

375. Fortune chose thee to be the end of time. The 
Wind wrote Solomon on thy dust. 

(34) 376. God who gave thee youth and empire, gave thee 

the empire; do with it what thou wilt. 

377. Dust becomes gold by thy acceptance; poison 
becomes sugar by thy remembrance. 

378. If Fereidun does not drink wine with thee, the 
snakes of Zahhak will grow on his shoulders. 

379. Drink wine; thou hast a minstrel and a cup¬ 
bearer. Why grieve? Thou hast the eternal kingdom. 

380. Thou art the protector of the empire and the 
refuge of kings; thou ownest the sword and the crown. 

381. Though with the awe-inspiring sword thou 
tookest the crown and the throne, 

382. Thou scatterest treasure like the Caliphs; thou 
givest crowns and takest away thrones. 

383. The point of thy sword is over the crown. Why 
shouldst thou not take tribute from the kings? 

384. That head on which thy foot rests, takes a 
throne. How fortunate is that heart in which thou hast 
a place. 

385. The owl in thy era gives good fortune like the 
Phoenix. The head which reaches thy presence is lowered 
to the ground. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


117 


386. The notorious reprobate is guided. Because of 
thee, complaint has come to complain. 

387. Under the hoof of thy steed, which is the pillar 
of the earth, thy enemy is nailed to the ground like a 
horseshoe. 

388 The seven heavens are a casket for thy jewel; 
the eight paradises are a pennon on thy standard. 

389. He who does not obey thy order, finds the crown 
on his head turn to a halter. 

390. Thou art the master of all and every art. Thou 
art the soul of both worlds in one body. 

(35) 391. Punish generosity; kindle the candle of speech. 

392. Bestow the exalted robe of honour on servitude ; 
grant the hope of acceptance to Nezami. 

393. Though speech is nourishing and life-giving, it 
is lean wdien it reaches thy table. 

394. This sea and this mine are without pearls and 
rubies; give them pearls from the hand and rubies from 
the lips, 

395. And to him who is envious, give ungrudgingly 
rubies from the arrow and pearls from the sword. 

396. Since heaven gave thee a happy omen, may 
the conclusion of thy work be acceptable. 

397. On thy road are those who are prosperous and 
those who are destroyed. Prosperity is mine ; destruction 
is the lot of thine enemy. 

398. Thy victory has raised its head like a banner, 
and thy foe has lowered his head like a pen. 


On the honour and dignity of this book 

399. I who am the singer of this new rose, am the 
melodious nightingale of thy garden. 





118 


MAKHZANOL A SEAR 


400. I live on the road of thy love; I ring a bell down 
thy street. 

401. I have not accepted a loan from any man; I 
have spoken what my heart has bidden me to say. 

402. I have created a new magic; I have made a 
figure from a new mould. 

403. For a while I studied the sciences of polite 
learning; I embroidered the magic curtain of the dawn. 

404. It holds the capital of poverty and of kingship; 
it holds the Treasury of the Divine Mysteries. 

(36) 405. No fly has tainted its sugar; neither has its fly 

contaminated the sugar of any man. 

406. Noah throws down his shield, when he reaches 
this sea; Khezr breaks his pitcher at this spring. 

407. I put up this beauty to be raffled for by all the 
kings; thy name was the fortunate winner. 

408. Two books came from two famous places; each 
was dedicated to a Bahrain Shah. 

409. One has minted gold from the old mine, and 
the other has produced pearls from the new sea. 

410. One has raised its banner in Ghaznin, and the 
other has struck the Roman die on its coin. 

411. Although the words on that coin are like gold, 
my golden coin is better still. 

412. Though my baggage is less than his; yet I have 
a better customer. 

413. The style is wonderful, accept it. It w 7 ill not 
be strange, if thou shouldst favour it, 

414. Because these words which are set in a better 
order than the design of a garden, are not lit by external 
means like a lamp. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


119 


415. In this world, it is more prosperous than the 
world itself, newer than the heaven, yet born before it. 

416. It takes no colour from any existing sign; it does 
not fit any existing tongue. 

417. None has touched the provender of speech at 
thy table; partake thou of it. 

418. If it is savoury, partake of it; may it nourish 
thee; if not, mayest thou forget it. 

419. On the night when thou sittest at the table of 
heaven, throw down a bone to me, 

420. Because, indeed, I boast that I am thy dog; 
I am proud to be thy slave. 

421. Out of all the kings who have shown me fidelity, 
I have desired to attach myself to thee. 

422. My service will at last lead to some recognition, 
and the end of this cord will reach its place. 

423. Though the eulogists have prostrated themselves 
at this enduring threshold, 

424. They stajid respectfully before Nezami; he is 
different; who are these others ? 

425. I who have remained in this, their stage, have 
travelled on a stage beyond them. 

426. I made my sword from the diamond of my 7 
tongue; I beheaded all who followed me. 

427. The sword of Nezami which strikes off heads, is 
not blunted, though it is old. 

428. Though this dignity itself is unrivalled; yet my 
foot aspires to a still higher position. 

429. The pinnacle is high ; I soar above it, maybe that 
I shall prosper by my high spirit, 

430. So that, perchance, by the light of thy judgment, 
I may 7 place my head where thy foot rests. 




120 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


431. I follow thee, that I may reach to heaven. If 
thou bearest me not, how shall I reach it? 

432. It wag my intention during these last months 
to renew the covenant of my prostration before the king. 

433. Though in this circle which they have drawn, 
they have closed the road of my exit, 

434. I desired so eagerly to come before thee to 
receive increase of favours, that my body could not con¬ 
tain my soul, 

(38) 435. But when I looked again, there were lions all 

the way ; before and behind me were daggers and swords ; 

436. Yet in this place which is encircled by swords, 
I read the Khotbeh to thee with a loud voice. 

437. I have sprinkled thy threshold with the water 
of speech; I am the pebble which has remained in its 
place. 

438. Oh sun, I am like a mote before thee; may my 
morning prayers be answered ! 

439. My heart has become a sea pouring out pearls 
to thee; the jewel of my soul has become the ornament 
on thy girdle. 

440. So long as night and day exist, may thy nights 
be days; may the jewel of thy kingship illuminate the 
night. 

441. May this house of thine be auspicious, and may 
that house of thine be yet more auspicious. 

Discourse on the excellence of speech 

442. The first movement of the Pen produced the 
first letter of the Word. 

443. When they drew back the curtain of non¬ 
existence, the first manifestation was the Word. 







the treasury op mysteries 


121 


444. Until the voice of the Heart spoke, the soul 
did not submit its free self to the clay. 

445. When the Pen began to move, it opened the 
eyes of the world by means of the Word. 

446. Without speech the world has no voice; much 
has been spoken, but the Word has not diminished. 

447. In the language of love, speech is our soul. 
We are speech; these ruins are our palaces. 

448. The line of every thought which is written, is 
bound to the wings of the birds of speech. 

449. In this ever-changing old world, there is no 
subtlety finer than speech. 

450. The beginning of thought and the final reckon¬ 
ing is speech; remember this word. 

451. Kings have thought it worthy of a crown, and 
others have called it by other names. 

452. At times the voice of speech is raised by banners ; 
at other times it is written with the pen. 

453. It wins more victories than banners, and it 
conquers more empires than the pen. 

454. Though speech does not show its beauty to the 
worshippers of imagination, 

455. We who have looked upon speech, are its lovers, 
and by it we live. 

456. The laggards were warmed by its fire ; the eager 
travellers drew water from it. 

457. In this world it is more prosperous than the 
world itself, newer than heaven, yet born before it. 

458. It takes no colour from any existing sign; it 
does not fit any existing tongue. 


122 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


459. To such a degree that where the Word raises 
its banner, language and voice are both silent. 

460. If the Word had not woven the thread of the 
soul, how could the soul have been strung on this thread? 

(40) 461. They gain the empire of nature by speech; they 

make the seal of the laws with speech. 

462. The mine had our words and its own gold; it 
took both to one who understands speech, 

463. Saying : “ Tell me, which is better, the new 
speech, or the old gold? ” He answered : “ The new 
speech.” 

464. The messenger of speech travels on his head; 
none succeeds as speech succeeds. 

465. Strike the die on the silver of speech whose 
dust is coins. Gold is worthless; it is the gazelle tied 
to the saddle strap of speech. 

466. Speech holds a higher place than any man. The 
wealth of this empire belongs to speech alone. 

467. None but the Heart understand the Word; the 
explanation of the Word is beyond speech. 

468. So long as the Word exists, may its fame con¬ 
tinue ; may the name of Nezami be kept fresh by his 
words. 

The superiority of poetry to prose 

469. Since ordinary unrhymed speech is as a gem 
to the jewellers, 

470. Bemember this subtle point, see what a weighed 
subtlety would be when it is measured. 

471. Poets who raise their voices, gain the treasure 
of both worlds by their poetry, 

472. Especially as The key of the treasury lies under 
the tongue of the poet. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


123 


473. He who made the balance of speech, educated 
the fortunate ones by his words. 

(41) 474. The poets are the nightingales of heaven; how 
do they resemble others? 

475. When they are disturbed by the fire of thought, 
they are of the family of the angels. 

476. Poetry, the curtain of mystery, is a shadow of 
the prophetic veil. 

477. Two ranks stand before God; in front are the 
prophets, and the poets are behind. 

478. These two visions gaze upon the same Friend. 
These two are the kernel; all others are the shell. 

479. Every date from this table is not speech; it is 
life itself; 

480. It is a soul created by the clay beak, a thought 
ground in the mill of the heart. 

481. Poetry, the fount of knowledge, is dishonoured 
by base poets for a mere loaf. 

482. He who sings on this note, is in a better world 
than this. 

483. The saint who conquers the world by meditation, 
will not lower his head at every threshold. 

484. When he makes his knee-cap the feet of his 
heart, he embraces both worlds. 

485. The crown of his head comes down to greet his 
feet; he brings his feet and head together in a circle. 

486. In the curve of that circle, he is quickened; 
he destroys life and recreates it. 

(42) 487. At times, from that circle of meditation, he 
pierces the ear of heaven with a thousand rings of 
servitude; 



124 


MAKHZANOL ASKAR 


488. At other times, by means of this turquoise- 
coloured juggler’s cup, he bringB out ten beads where 
there is only one. 

489. When the steed of his eloquence is heated by 
words, life itself comes out to kiss his lips. 

490. To dig out the ruby from the mine, he pene¬ 
trates the seven spheres of heaven. 

491. He assigns the child, his flowing poetry, to his 
poetic talent, the father. 

492. The curved heaven comes forth to serve him; 
he will be safe from the calamity of serving others. 

493. His prayers will bring comfort to mankind; his 
words will be a seal on their tongues. 

494. Whoso paints this picture, attach thyself to his 
words, because he is a poet. 

495. I would call h im the Jupiter of the magic word 
and deem him to be the Venus who caused the downfall 
of Harut. 

496. This baggage train which was captured by 
warrior knights, was debased by mean poets. 

497. It has dazed my judgment to know that poets 
have dishonoured poetry. 

498. How can the fruit of the heart, which is worth 
life itself, be like water to be exchanged for a loaf? 

499. Oh heaven, since these knots which they have 
tied on their belts, are beyond the reach of thy hands, 

500. The work is beyond thy reach; untie these 
knots in the cord of speech with thy toe. 

I 501. The beggars who die for the love of gold, have 
destroyed the value of this silver for the sake of gold. 

502. He who gave luminous coins for gold, exchanged 
lustrous pearls for stones. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


125 


503. Therefore these people who have more knowledge 
are humbler, though they are greater. 

504. He who wore the gold-embroidered robe of the 
king, suffered in the end from the sword, 

505. And he who, like quicksilver, did not desire 
gold, became silver and did not suffer from the sword 
of Sanjar. 

506. Since thy poetry is as sweet as honey, do not 
cheapen it; do not let flies contaminate the sweetness 
of thy poetry. 

507. Ho not take even fidelity, unless it is given thee 
freely. Ho not speak, even if it were to pray, unless they 
listen to thee. 

508. Until thou art well versed in the Mohammadan 
law, beware, be not betrothed to poetry. 

509. Poetry will seat thee on the Tree of Paradise ; 
it will make thee ruler of the empire of the spirit. 

510. Through the Mohammadan law thy poetry will 
reach a stage where the shadow of thy girdle will reach 
to the Gemini. 

511. Poetry will give thee a princely name; for 
Poets are the princes of words. 

512. Like heaven, thou shouldst not rest, until thy 
poetry is as high as heaven. 

(44) 513. Humble thyself like the candle; die during the 

day and live during the night. 

514. When the steed of thought gallops hotly, the 
swift heaven slackens its speed. 

515. It is better to accept words slowly, so that thou 
ma.yest receive them from a sublime hand. 





126 


MA KHZ AN or, ASKAR 


516. If thou dost riot approve whatever is shown thee 
behind this veil, they will show thee a better thing. 

517. If thou aequirest a pearl, do not wear it im¬ 
mediately ; seek a better one than thou hast. 

518. He who bore his standard on this road, carried 
off the ball from the sun and won the race from the moon. 

519. Though his inspiration did not move quickly, he 
did not slacken his effort for one moment. 

520. When his thought moved swiftly, he won the 
race from heaven; yet he w T as still unsatisfied. 

521. The pinions of Gabriel were his steed; the wings 
of the angel Esrafil were his fan. 

522. Do not sacrifice to others this seed. Do not 
entrust this string to any man. 

523. The fig tree would be bare, if every bird could 
eat figs. 

524. I who am perfect in this art, am worthy to be 
seen, for I am true. 

525. The temple of poetry was founded by me; the 
art of poetry was freed from the tavern. 

(45) 526. The ascetic and the monks rushed towards me ; 

they threw down their cloaks and belts. 

527. I still am like a rose-bud; I still expect the north 
wind. 

528. If I show the new poetry, my voice will be the 
trumpet call of the day of resurrection. 

529. Everyone, young and old, is fascinated by the 
magic of my words. 

530. My art has removed the patience of magic; my 
magic is the spell which deceives the angels. 

531. My Babylon is Ganjeh which seduces Harut; 
my Venus is my mind which lights the stars. 





THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


12T 


532. The Venus of this zone pertains to Libra; there¬ 
fore it possesses spiritual speech. 

533. Night is the food of my lawful magic; it has 
blotted out the recipe of Harut. 

534. The image of Nezami, my thought, lives by my 
lawful magic. 


Describing the night and cognizing the heart 

535. When the defeat of the sun caused the earth to 
throw its shield on the water, 

) 536. The world was more exhausted than the sun 

and yellower than its shield. 

537. When the sun threw dow»n its shield, its army 
drew their swords meaning to slay it. 

538. When the ox which is adorned with beads, falls, 
all draw their daggers. 

539. When the child of night caught hold of its nurse, 
she tied the bell of the day onto its ankles. 

540. To dispel its fear of the night, she prepared for 
it an elixir from the dust. 

541. The dust became the breath of its Messiah and 
threw water on the fire of its melancholy. 

542. The draught agreed with the patient, and the 
child left the house of fear. 

543. The patient lost a bowlful of blood and became 
black as ink from head to foot. 

544. The inner colour appeared externally. Provi¬ 
dence said : “It was of the unbelievers.” 

545. Each moment, to charm the heart, the night 
played a different scene. 





128 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


546. At times it adorned the garment of the moon 
with roses; at other times it caused the harp of Venus 
to scatter silver coins. 

547. I, on such a moonless night, was the nightingale 
of that paradise which was without a garden. 

548. I mingled the blood of my heart with speech 
and lit a fire with the water of my heart. 

549. When I held discourse with my own words in 
my solitude, I pondered on his counsel : 

550. The Angel of solitude called to me, saying : 

‘ ‘ Borrow in such wise that thou ma.yest be able to repay. 

551. “Why is there water in this thy pure fire? 
Why is desire the slave of thy dust? 

552. “ Entrust the feverish dust to the coffin; expend 
the burning fire on rubies. 

553. “ Do not shoot arrows, because thy judgment 
is the target. Do not strike, for the horse is thine own 
foot. 

554. “ Sit no longer unheeding; if thou hast water 
pour it out on the threshold of the Heart. 

555. “ In the curve of this lovely azure dome, sing 
the beautiful song of the Heart. 

556. “ Escape from the senses which are the robbers. 
The Heart knows thy road, know thou the Heart. 

557. “ These heavenly wayfarers who are free from 
the body, have fastened the pinions of the Archangel 
Gabriel to their Hearts, 

558. “ And he who has abandoned both worlds, re¬ 
ceives nourishment by begging at the door of the Heart. 

559. “ If this material water and clay were the 
Heart, thou must needs admit that the ass also has a 
Heart. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


129* 


560. “ All creatures live in virtue of their life; live 
thou by thy Heart, that is true life. 

561. “ The eye and the ear are superfluous to the 
divine purpose; they are the ministers of the outward 
veil. 

562. “ Thine ear is filled with cotton like the calyx 
of the rose; thine eyes are the ulcers on the eye of thy 
reason. 

563. “ Oh thou, who brandest both the narcissus and 
the rose, why dost thou worship them? 

564. “ The vigour of youth is fire enough for the eye 
which is the mirror of all unworthiness. 

565. “ When poetic talent is wedded to reason, one 
expects profit from forty years of life. 

566. “ At forty years, when he reaches maturity, the 
expenses of his journey are increased. 

567. “Thou needest a friend now; do not recite 
spells; do not now learn the lesson of forty years. 

568. “ Stretch out thy hand and seek a remedy; 
seek a Heart sympathetic to these sorrows of the heart. 

569. “ Do not grieve, truly the Heart will console; 
if the Heart is thy friend, thou wilt conquer thy sorrow. 

570. “ The help of friends is a great solace to the 
wretched who is vanquished by grief. 

571. “ A hundred of his sorrows will vanish, when 
for a moment he is warmed by friendship. 

572. “ When the first dawn raises its banner, the 
next dawn challenges the stars. 

573. “If the second dawn did not come to its aid, 
the first dawn would be humbled. 

574. “Of thyself, thou canst do nothing; seek a 
friend, because nothing is better than a friend. 







130 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


575. “ Although not every country is Khar, seek a 
friend, because nothing is better than a friend. 

576. “ Everyone needs a friend, especially a helpful 
friend. 

577. “ These few friends that thou hast, are full of 
desire ; they are less helpful than the knocker on the door. 

578. “ Hold fast to the saddle strap of the Heart; 
thy honour is to be the slave of the Heart. 

579. “ When the Lord of the heavenly Throne 
created the universe, he created the empires of form and 
soul. 

580. “ In a fitting order, he joined the form -with the 
soul. 

581. “ From these two lovers, the Heart was born, 
a child who attained the Caliphate. 

582. “ The Heart to which the proclamation of 
kingship is read, is a union of the physical and the spiri¬ 
tual natures. 

583. “ The lustre of thy world comes from the Can¬ 
opus of thy Heart. The form and the soul are both 
parasites on the Heart.” 

584. When the word of the Heart reached my brain, 
the oil of my brain fed the light of my lamp. 

585. I listened intently in this company and made 
my soul the target of the angel of the soul. 

£86. I gained eloquence from this nourishment. I 
was full of happiness, and my sorrows vanished. 

587. I wept cold tears, because the fire of my Heart 
had heated me. 

588. I released my hands from those fetters. The 
robbers were impotent, and I was strong. 








THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


131 


589. Galloping on that road. I travelled two stages, 
until with one bound I reached the door of the Heart. 

(50) 590. 1 went to the Heart, and my life nearly expired. 

Half my life passed in that midnight. 

591. At the door of my spiritual sanctuary, the polo- 
stick of my body bent into a ball. 

592. My polo-stick carried off the ball. My head 
bent to my feet. 

593. My feet and my head were joined together. I 
was a ball and appeared like a polo-stick. 

594. I lost control of my affairs and became uncon¬ 
scious of myself. I saw a hundred things as one, and 
one thing as a hundred. 

595. My fellow travellers were ignorant, and I was 
a novice on the journey. My exile was more bitter than 
my loneliness. 

596. There was no way by which I could pass through 
that door; I had no power to enter; neither could I 
retreat. 

597. Since I had lost my speech in that tunnel, Love, 
the guide, held my reins. 

598. I knocked at the door; he said : “ Who comes 
at this hour? ” I replied : “ If it would please thee to 
give audience, it is a human being.” 

599. The leaders drew back the curtain and destroyed 
the veil of form ; 

600. Therefore the noblest in the house called, 
saying: ‘‘Enter Nezami.” 

601. I became the most favoured confidant of that 
threshold. I was called on to enter, and I went still 
further in. 

602. I found a court brilliantly lit. May the evil 
eye be turned from that scene. 


132 


MAKHZANOL ASEAE 


603. There were seven rulers in one house, seven 
stories in one fable. 

(51) 604. The empire was greater than that of the heavens. 
How rich is the clust of that land ! 

605. In the country of the breath of the warm breeze , 
the mid-day sun was seated on the throne. 

606. A horseman, dressed in red, stood in reverence 
before him. One, dressed like a ruby, was his counsellor 
of victory. 

607. A bitter youth was his advance guard in the 
chase; below him was a black slave, drinking the dregs. 

608. A lasso thrower sat in ambush; an invulnerable 
one wore silver armour. 

609. All these were the moths, and the Heart was 
the candle. They were all scattered, but the Heart was 
collected. 

610. I became the contented guest of the Heart and 
gave my soul as an offering to the sovereign Heart. 

611. When I found the banner of the army of the 
Heart, I turned away my face from the whole world. 

612. The Heart said tenderly : “ Oh thou speechless 
one, seek the bird and leave this nest. 

613. “ My fire does not confide in this smoke, because 
that is the salt, and this piece is not even salted. 

614. “ My shadow has more power than this cypress. 
My foot is above this stage. 

(52) 615. “ I am a treasure, but not in the purse of Aaron. 

I am not with thee; neither am I outside thee.” 

616. Through the warm breath of the Heart, the bird 
of my lips shed the feathers of its tongue in shame. 

617. I bowed my head in shame; my ears wore the 
ring of servitude out of respect. 









THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


133 


618. My master, the Heart, renewed my covenant 
and made the name of Nezami resound in heaven. 

619. As I saw no escape from discipline, I received 
my training from that master. 

THE FIRST SECLUSION 
To nourish the heart 

620. When my trainer began to break me in, he 
freed me from the knots of the nine spheres of heaven. 

621. Though the rope was full of knots, he did not 
give up the struggle to untie them, 

622. Until this affair reached a stage where the knots 
in the rope were untied. 

623. Briefly, the piaster who is in our prison, although 
he is not God, yet he is our Lord. 

624. He is my guide in both worlds; otherwise why 
should he be anxious about my soul? 

625. Though I have not often been in accord with 
him, yet he will not withhold his affection from me. 

626. That trainer tamed me, when he became a 
slave to me who was untamed. 

627. He was not defeated by such as me. He con¬ 
sidered association with dust as a gain. 

628. One day, from this Egypt which shelters Poti- 
pliar’s wife, Joseph-like he came out of the well. 

629. When the eyes of night closed in sleep, they lit 
the eye of the lamp of dawn. 

630. The dawn became a lamp, illuminating the sky; 
the black cloak of night turned into the red border of 
the day. 

631. The master took a lamp, held my hand, and 
led me to a garden. 




134 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


632. He freed my skirt from the thorn of grief, when 
he filled my lap with roses. 

633. I laughed like the lips of the tulip and tore 
my garment in a hundred places like the rose. 

634. The tulip entrusted its own heart to my soul; 
the rose girded my loins with its own belt. 

635. At times I blushed all over like one drunk with 
wine; a.t other times I blossomed out like a rose. 

636. I hurried from rose to rose and from branch 
to branch to where the water was gushing forth, 

637. Until the banner of love reached a place where 
a perfume of fidelity scented the air. 

638. A subtle breeze with an eloquent tongue, like 
the breath of Messiah, made my heart live. 

639. It cast down my litter and gave my steed to the 
wind. 

(54) 640. It said to me : “ Dismount and do not speak 

of thyself; otherwise I will separate thee from thyself.” 

641. I, who was like a boat on that water, was calmed 
by that heavenly breeze. 

642. The water w r as flowing, and I dismounted; 
parched with thirst, I reached the bank of the river. 

643. It was a spring brighter than the sun; the 
Prophet Khezr had not seen it even in his dreams in 
heaven. 

644. Its jasmine garden was a resting place; its 
open narcissus would lull one to sleep. 

645. It was on the circle of heaven; the ambergris of 
the perfume of Paradise was its slave. 

646. The rose had a place on the bosom of the 
jasmine; the thorn trod on the skirt of the rose. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


135 


647. The gazelle and the fox had given musk to the 
rose and fur to the thorn in that meadow. 

648. The parrot had shed its feathers on the grass 
because of that sweetly smelling rose. 

649. The green herbs were as beautiful as the plumage 
of parrots.. The gazelles were fattened by their sweetness. 

650. The north wind blew through the bower of 
roses. The gazelles ate flowers from the branches of 
the herbs. 

651. The variegated daisies were massed together and 
fanned the air with grey ambergris. 

652. Its scene gave collyrium like the narcissus. Its 
vegetation was tiger lilies like emerald. 

653. The jasmine and the rose robbed the caravan. 
The turtle dove and the nightingale sang together. 

654. The day-lily with the tongue of Jesus showed 
the hand of Moses to the dawn. 

655. The ring dove, crying in the dawn, made the 
heavens grey with its sighs. 

656. The breeze was writing the story of the rose 
upon the leaves of the palm willow with a hand of hope. 

657. At times the spring came to greet the meadow; 
at times the rose came in thanksgiving to the thorn. 

658. The white jasmine had pitched its tent on the 
plain ; the pennon on the tent pole reached to the Pleiades. 

659. The tulip came to the fire temple of mystery and 
prayed like the Indian Magi. 

660. The black tulip and the white jasmine were like 
the crow and the Canopus Star of Yaman. 

661. The boat of the garden, with red and yellow 
banners, had windows of lapiz lazuli. 







136 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


662. The water was smooth like ermine; how beauti¬ 
ful is ermine with sable 1 

(56) 663. The branches were stirred by the light of heaven 
and scattered silver coins beneath the feet of the shadows. 

664. The shadows spoke with their lips of sunshine. 
The pebbles were alive swimming in the water. 

665. The white rose was blistered by the kisses of the 
hyacinth; the lips of the rose were chafed by the eye¬ 
lashes of the bud. 

666. As the quiver of the dandelion was empty of 
_arrows, sometimes it asked for a shield and sometimes 

for quarter. 

667. The willow, struck by magic, trembled; the 
tulip was the censer for its incense. 

668. The meadow was so full of life that it wished 
to fly; the jasmine was so delicate that it wished to drop. 

669. The sugar cane had sprouted with sweet 
laughter; the brown rose bush had come forth with 
red shoes. 

670. The self-whiled wild rose spoke by the breath of 
the wind. 

671. The sky was greener than the leaf of the tan¬ 
gerine tree and had appeared at morning with an orange 
in its hand. 

672. Since the sky had decorated its banner in that 
place, the meadow demanded its boat. 

673. Every knot on the string of that green table-cloth 
was the life of the earth and the heart of the sky. 

(57) 674. It seemed as though the star of good omen said 
to the earth in the morning : ‘ ‘ Mayest thou be happy ’ ’, 

675. Or that the sky had passed by and exchanged 
its emeralds for rubies. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


137 


676. Tlie spring was brighter than the eyes of the 
celestial maidens, that it might dim the source of the light 
of the sun. 

677. The verdure had made its ablutions at that 
spring, gave thanks for its purification, and arose. 

678. The bird had inhaled the perfume of Solomon 
from the rose; therefore it sang the songs of David. 

679. The claws of the partridge, stained with the 
blood of the pheasant, hung a chain around the bole of 
the cypress tree. 

680. The law-givers of the garden ordained for the 
nightingale the death of the crow. 

681. The secret of the heart of the owl whose body 
was the product of that land, was his own death sentence. 

682. The north wind, with the help of radiant 
Canopus, tanned the rough leather of the earth to 
smoothness. 

683. The tulip was breathless with the palpitation of 
its heart, because of the speed with which it had hastened. 

684. The shadow of the beauty-loving box tree had 
laid its hand on the heart of the tulip. 

(58) 685. The silvery fingers of the dawn-coloured jasmine 

had taken from the night the whole of its crescent moon. 

686. The Joseph-like sun, roped with gold, dug the 
pit of the dimple of the jasmine. 

687. The earth had put on a robe of yellow muslin 
like the Jews, because the water showed its white hand 
like Moses. 

688. The earth had made a medicine of that water, 
and whatever it had swallowed it brought forth again. 

689. The light of the dawn had found the arena free. 
The branches gave leave to the breeze to walk in the 
shade. 




138 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


690. The shadows bit the lips of the sun, and the 
wind combed the tresses of the willow. 

691. Shadow and sunshine danced on the banks of 
the stream through the banners of the branches. 

692. The thorn became aloe-wood which was my 
object, and the fire of the rose was the censer for that 
incense. 

693. The stalk of the rose was the pulpit of the 
nigiitingale, and the tendrils of the violet were the girdle 
of the rose. 

694. The bird sang more sweetly than David; the 
rose scattered more nectar than Nezami. 


The fruit of the first seclusion 

(59) 695. The wind lifted the veil sideways. The master 

hastily returned to his love-making. 

696. He saw one with scented breath and sweet 
laughter, who had given colour to the rose and sweetness 
to sugar. 

697. The intrigues of that beauty, clothed in muslin, 
had burnt the harvest of the moon, as a fire burns reeds. 

698. From her tresses she had woven armour to her 
waist. She was beautiful from head to foot. 

699. Since to see her dazzled the eyes, whosb beheld 
her shed salt tears. 

700. Since her savour had been mixed with sweetness, 
it destroyed the sweetness of the beauties. 

701. The parrot of the garden was put to shame by 
her sweetness. Her chin had a ring like that on the head 
of the parrot. 

702. Close to that beautiful orange-shaped chin, a 
silvery neck was formed on her breast. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


139 


703. Cherisher of drunkards like the rose of the 
garden, destroyer of repentance like the wine of a friend, 

704. Her lips, like a Tabari, had in them the red wood 
of Tabarestan with which they crush the sugar cane. 

705. She was a red rose fresher than sugar cane, a 
dry sugar candy full of rose water. 

(60) 706. Her black mole which burnt the heart, was the 
ambergris pounded in the oyster shell of the dawn. 

707. Yearning for that black mole, the full moon 
became a mole. 

708. Her eyes burnt the heart more than the sun; 
her lips illuminated the night more than the moon. 

709. Because of the baggage of the pilgrim hearts 
which surrounded her for miles, the road to her was as 
narrow as her mouth. 

710. My heart was broken in my breast by that hard 
heart of hers which destroyed hearts. 

711. She spoke with a sweet smile on her lips; her 
face pleaded, and her airs and graces were magical. 

712. Like a casket of gems, she had closed her mouth 
and had left an opening only as large as a bead. 

713. When love saw that casket and that bead, it 
performed wonders and spread the magician’s carpet. 

714. It loosened the burden of form from my girdle 
and freed my soul from the fetters of the body. 

715. My burden became unbearable, because the 
water of life passed my lips. 

(61) 716. Our magical reason saw a demon; it suffered 
iron chains to gain this silver. 

717. The heart which was relieving its sorrows with 
joy, was closing the eyes of the sun with clay. 







140 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


718. The companion which takes away grief, is grief 
itself. The remedy for one suffering from the after effects 
of wine is the wine itself. 

719. Oh thou, whose brow is marked by my brand, 
and who art ignorant of my meadow and my garden, 

720. The meadow was Heaven, and the vision its 
Splendour. The garden was the night and tears its water. 

721. And she whose face was jealously veiled, was the 
mirror for the face of sincerity. 

722. For a long time my head rested on my knees, 
until I understood this mystery. 

723. I have made this journey on the road of certainty. 
Go thou on the road by which I have travelled. 

724. Thou hast not the secret of this road, beware, 
leave Nezami’s work to Nezami. 

THE SECOND SECLUSION 
On the revelry of the night 

725. One night, the master, desiring the company of 
his own kind, spent a few moments with some of them. 

726. He found a night as beautiful as the dawn, and 
everything desired was present : 

727. An assembly more radiant than the beginning 
of spring, a joy more tranquil than providence. 

728. Yearn thou for a glimpse of its radiance, de¬ 
scribing Joseph and his shirt. 

(62) 729. The guardian night had destroyed the watch¬ 

man, and its sweetness was forbidden to flies. 

730. The minstrels were wonderful in their melody, 
the veiled beauties wonderful in their fidelity. 

731. The jar was in the hennaed hand of the beloved, 
pouring wine into crystal cups. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


141 


732. The candle of the heart was burning like the 

heart of a candle; the fire of the heart burnt like the 

heart of fire. 

738. On the tray of the censer which illuminated the 
assembly, the aloe-wood made sugar, and the sugar con¬ 
sumed the aloe-wood. 

734. The rose scattered sugar from rose-water, the 
candle gold from its wick. 

735. To provide the delicious sweetmeats served with 
the wine, eyes and mouths poured sugar and almonds. 

736. Sugar and almonds discoursed of subtleties; 

Venus and Mars wooed one another. 

737. The promise had reached the ear; laughter 

begged for nourishment. 

738. The beloved, like a leopard, sat on fox furs; 
the musk of the gazelle was a chain for the lion. 

739. The beloved drew the lover to herself and trailed 
her skirt on the ground. In her dance, her hands 
scattered gems. 

740. Like the cup-bearer, the candle had a bowl of 
wine in its hands; the bowl was stained with wine, and 
the moth was intoxicated. 

741. Sleep, like the moth, had shed its wings; the 
candle had bowed its head in thanksgiving. 

742. Chaste Venus was entirely absorbed in playing 
the right melody. 

743. Minds robbed each other of sleep. Lamps 
borrowed lights from each other. 

744. One could find among that company in one in¬ 
stant all that one would find in a whole lifetime. 

745. Bach moment the heart, the body, and the soul 
provided food for each other. 








142 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


746. One would say that, from the room which they 
had prepared, they had thrown the garment of annihila¬ 
tion into non-existence. 

747. The bird of joy tied the letter to its wing; it 
broke the seven wings of the bird of the Pleiades. 

748. The fire of the bird of dawn, roasting on the 
spit, cooled the heart of the beauties. 

749. The bird of dawm was in a deeper sleep than 
one asleep in the early morning. The foot of heaven 
was tied tighter than the hand of the moon. 

750. The knocker on the door was a barrier against 
strangers. The tresses of the fairies were the chains 
of the insane. 

751. In the curve of that ring the heart of Jupiter 
was caught as though in a tight finger-ring. 

752. The beauties, like fairies, had raided the hearts 
of the nobles. 

753. They had planted jasmine on the road of the 
heart ; they had collected the thorns with the tips of 
their eye-lashes. 

754. The sugar cane of their cheeks was the fruit 
of the heart; their tall stature was the rose tree of life. 

755. The sugared hazel-nuts and the small almonds 
had lines like carmine-coloured pistachio-nuts. 

756. The magic coquetry and the black mole had 
wrought a lawful spell by the black eyebrows. 

757. The w r orld was constantly bewitched and en¬ 
slaved by such coquetry a,nd such a beauty spot. 

758. After the eyes saw those beautiful visions, the 
heart went on pilgrimage to the eyes. 

759. The tongues of airs and graces were sharper 
than thorns; the tresses were more entangled than my 
affairs. 








THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


143 


760. When the hand of coquetry held the bow, it hit 
the mark without shooting the arrow. 

761. The spirit of Messiah blew from the breath of 
the heart, and the water of life poured out from the mouth 
of the clay. 

762. The rose, like the jasmine, contained ambergris; 
the moon, like heaven, carried a. saddle-cloth on its 
shoulders. 

763. When the cheeks and the lips of the beloved 
poured out sugar and almond, the rose fled to get help 
from the sugar. 

764. Each vision was the life of a world; every eye¬ 
lash was the temple of the idol of the soul. 

765. The black tresses on the white silver scattered 
musk upon the leaves of the palm willow. 

766. Her silvery neck which had a line as clear as 
water, became a rainbow in the shining sun. 

767. The tresses were Abraham, and the face was 
his fire; the eyes were Ishmail and the eyelashes his 
dagger. 

768. From these the fire had become a bunch of 
sweet herbs, and from those the dagger a heart-ravishing 
narcissus. 

769. Like wine, the kisses produced intoxication; like 
Messiah, the lips gave the breath qf life. 

770. The perspiration on her cheek was like dew on 
red and white roses. The harvest of the moon was like 
the cluster of the Pleiades. 

771. The button of the collar of the celestial maiden 
was loosened; it was as though the line of night had 
received the decree of the light. 

772. The spirit of the high and the heart of the 
lowly were, by that light, maddened like those in delirium. 






144 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


773. Her airs and graces were the herald, as her 
mouth was tired; her eyes spoke, as her tongue was 
speechless. 

774. Wine, like the rose, was the ornament of the 
empire; the bowl, like the narcissus, was gold in silver. 

775. In that circle reason was intoxicated, and in 
the end it lost patience. 

(66) 776. Since laughter had not left room in the mouth, 

endurance was unable to sigh. 

777. Patience had exhausted its melody on that note ; 
the rebellion of the mind had a high note. 

778. The rebellion found in the songs of David the 
story of Mahmud and the tale of Ayaz. 

779. The poetry of Nezami scatters sugar and is 
perpetually on the lips of the beautiful singers of odes. 


The fruit of the second seclusion 

780. Life spent on that carpet, woven in eternity, 
is spent profitably. 

781. The ear congratulates it on that work, and the 
eyes read in it songs of adoration. 

782. The laughter of its beauties saddens sweetness; 
sight takes collyrium from the eyes of the fair gazelles. 

783. There my beloved, like the moon, dressed in 
muslin, has broken my heart like a reed. 

784. The moon which had cast away the night, had 
on that night remained until daybreak. 

785. When the arrows of her airs and graces flew 
swiftly, the soul came forward as her target, kissing the 
ground. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


145 


786. Her light filled the eyes of the candle with tears ; 
jealousy of her beauty ulcerated the eye of the lamp. 

(67) 787. The heart accepted in good faith every oppres¬ 

sion of her tyranny as a sign of blessing. 

788. At times, she was the verdure and I the stream 
of water; and at times, I was the bleacher and she the 
sun. 

789. I have no knowledge of that fruit of which I 
partook on that night. 

790. How could I have known that the new moon, 
whose girdle is light, would keep away from her lovers? 

791. She was in love with her own lover; her desire 
was a hundred times greater than mine. 

792. The heart in its desire says : “ What harm 
could have come to our day, had it not burnt the veil 
of our night, 

793. “ And had it made the night safe, that it might 
have endured to the day of resurrection? ” 

794. I search everywhere for the light of that night 
which was like the sun, and do not find it even in my 
dreams. 

795. I have had happiness only on that night; I have 
had no happy night since it bade me farewell. 

796. Since then I call upon God every night, praying 
that He may grant me that same vision. 

797. That was a clear day, not a dark night. It was 
night, but the night of the Ascent to Heaven. 

798. The moon, digging out rubies from the mine of 
heaven, dies every night of desire for that night. 

799. The day, which is the sworn enemy of the night, 
yearns also for that same night. 






146 


MAKHZANOL ASKAR 


(68) 800. I was carefree, when suddenly the sun, brandish¬ 
ing its sword, came in down the path of the dawn. 

801. The fire of the sun caused water to flow from my 
eyes on to my body. 

802. The clouds came to the garden playfully, cleans¬ 
ing the garments of the sun. 

803. At this well-spring of the dawn, many vessels 
such as thou and I have been broken. 

804. Heaven had gilt the pure silver of its stars with 
the golden leaves of the sun. 

805. The sleeping Dawn awoke swiftly with a dagger 
in her hand, prepared to shed blood. 

806. I threw down my shield on her battle-field and 
made my soul my shield against her dagger. 

807. To kill me, Dawn sprang from the stream, 
killing the thirsty one and destroying the bridge. 

808. A voice cried from my desolation, saying : “ Oh 
Dawn, is this my punishment? 

809. “ Formerly, when I had a companion, I had 
many candles to lighten my darkness. 

810. ‘ ‘ What did I gain from that night and that 
candle which departed from me? They vanished as 
though they had never been there. 

811. “ Sting him who ate thy honey; destroy him 
who humbled thee. 

(69) 812. “ Destroy the strong, because that is per¬ 

missible; to destroy the weak is easy.” 

813. When the Dawn saw my weeping, she shed 
tears of blood on the morn in sympathy. 

814. The harvest of the day was burnt by my sorrow. 
The source of the sun was saddened by my sighing. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 147 

815. In spite of all my suffering, heaven gave me 
hope. The snake of the night gave me the bead of the 
sun. 

816. I know not how 7 I felt the effect of the light of 
the daw r n, though I knew it. 

817. He who found the road to this moving cradle, 
found more than the light of the dawn. 

818. Oh thou, whose days of pleasure have shamefully 
blackened the face of thy nights, 

819. I who have described this night, have described 
it from personal experience. 

820. The night is the curtain of solitude; the candle 
is the jewel of vision. 

821. The aloe-wood and the rose-water are the groans 
and the tears of the weary. 

822. All the beauty of that seat of honour was the 
light of the Night of Power. 

823. Who under this heaven is trusted with the 
secrets veiled by the curtain of solitude? 

824. The dawn which has learnt to be like a moth, 
has never seen a more beautiful candle. 

825. Strive to be burnt by that candle, so that, like 
Nezami, thou mayest reach the light. 

THE EIEST DISCOURSE 

On the creation of Adam 

826. In the beginning, when the worship of love was 
not, there was no rumour of existence in non-existence. 

(70) 827. One chosen, prepared in the secrecy of non¬ 

existence, entered into existence and opened its door. 

828. He was the last-born child of the spirits and the 
first of the children of man. 








148 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


829. He raised the banner to rule, and like the banner 
he fell and he rose again. 

830. His pure quality is “ He taught Adam.” The 
honour of his dust is ‘‘He kneaded his clay.” 

831. His essence is both opaque and transparent. He 
is at the same time the touch-stone, the gold, and the 
money-changer. 

832. He is the new idol who disturbed the angels, 
the only bearer of the new order, the mirror of the sons 
of the dust. 

833. He is the bracelet on the arm of the soul; his 
arm carries the bracelet of the seven heavens. 

834. He is rocked in the two cradles and is the essence 
of the two gems mixed together. 

835. He bestows the robe of honour on the prisoners ; 
he is the watchman and the cup-bearer of the angels. 

836. He is honoured by being the beginning of crea¬ 
tion ; he broke the virginity of creation. 

837. He was a tongue-tied child forty days old, yet 
teaching the sage forty years of age. 

838. He came like a love letter beautifully written, 
like a rose tree from the garden of Paradise. 

839. A light from the all-seeing eyes, a bird from 
the highest tree of Paradise. 

840. He throws grain to the birds of heaven, there¬ 
fore all bow down before him, 

841. And he, for the sake of one grain, generously 
threw down the garment and the glory 

842. And was caught in the snare by a grain which 
was not worthy of acceptance; 

843. Therefore prayers came into being, and the 
whole world bowed down to him. 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


149 


844. At the door of the cynosure of all eyes, excep¬ 
tion was made to the prostration of a rebel. 

845. He scattered rose petals from the eight gardens 
on all, but brands on Satan. 

846. He had no joy without thee and could not rest 
a moment in the garden of Eram. 

847. He was not able to rule, because he was burdened 
with anxiety for thee. 

848. The love of wheat burned his heart; it split his 
heart as wheat is split. 

(72) 849. Through his newly created love of us, eating 

wheat became of small account to him. 

850. He who like wheat had neither forefathers nor 
descendants, could not prosper without the earth and the 
grindstone. 

851. Until he was thrown down, his desire was not 
realised, and he -was not honoured until he was crushed. 

852. His body was coloured like straw and was 
blistered like the starry sky. 

853. Like barley and wheat, he was tested in the 
earth for thy sake, oh hypocrite. 

854. Through eating that unworthy wheat, he was 
stripped like a grain of wheat. 

855. All the humiliation which he suffered from the 
enemy was caused by his desire to partake of that wheat, 

856. The wheat caused him great distress, and eating 
it was unwise. 

857. When mankind began to eat w r heat, the wheat 
opened its mouth wide. 

858. Oh thou, who hast lost sight of the purpose of 
life, thy snare has been that grain of wheat. 





150 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


859. Partake of barley bread and be patient; do not 
eat of the wheat which deceived Adam. 

860. Thou art the secret voice of the Heart, do not 
follow Satan; thou art the lion of the prince, do not be 
the dog of the door-keeper. 

861. It is impossible to wash the dirt from thy skin, 
unless thou repentest like Adam. 

862. To ask pardon befits him who has done a wrong, 
because Adam prospered through repentance. 

<73) 863. When Adam desired that grain, he was thrown 

out onto the field of the earth. 

864. He saw that his desire of this grain was un¬ 
profitable, and that he was entangled in this snare. 

865. He watered this withered rose and pitched his 
tent in Ceylon. 

866. He fled there, shamed by this sin, and threw 
that black dust on to his head. 

867. For a time, through the bad omen of the skies, 
he mourned in India. 

868. When the blackness of sin was washed from 
his hands, the indigo plant grew at his feet. 

869. He became white and beautiful like the moon; 
he hid the tresses of sin under his cap. 

870. When through repentance his heart was purified, 
he became the ruler of the empire of this earth. 

871. He planted the seed of fidelity in the land of 
justice and endowed us with the produce of that field. 

872. He left in this room with six doors all that the 
treasurer of Paradise gave him. 

873. Partake of this produce, because it is for thy 
benefit; he planted and thou must reap. 









THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


151 


874. Aloe-wood is burnt by the fire in the censer. 
The toil of the ass is for the ease of the saddle-maker. 

875. When thy affairs were settled in thy absence, 
they singled thee out for favours. 

(74) 876. Float like a rose on the waves of spring, that 
thou mayest not be anchored in the garden like a thorn. 

877. Go on bravely when thou seest autumn, because 
timidity burns the soul. 

878. Thou hast the appearance of a lion, but thou 
art not lion-hearted. Although thou hast a heart, thou 
hast no courage. 

879. One can paint a lion on a wall, but a hundred 
blows will not move it from its place. 

880. The heavenly robe does not befit thee; thou art 
dust and nothing but dust befits thee. 

881. The good fortune of thy affair declines; thy 
heart is small and thy sorrows great; 

882. Otherwise, why should the high heaven imprison 
in a city a conqueror like thee. 

883. Gird up thy loins like the circle. Thou art in 
the circle of heaven, treat heaven gently. 

884. It is the nature of fire to travel swiftly; it is 
good not to lag behind in the race. 

885. Be like water and run swiftly, because running 
water is precious. 

886. Those who are slim possess the gem of the body ; 
the soul is valuable, because it is ethereal. 

(75) 887. A light breeze is like a soul in its movement; 
thou art heavier than the mountain of Qaf. 

888. If thou art not deceived by colour like a thorn, 
do not admire thyself like a violet. 




152 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


889. The house is polished, and thy face is every¬ 
where ; therefore thine eye looks a,t thyself. 

890. Although thou art reflected on every side, yet 
thou art none of those reflections. 

891. Thou art thine own lover and a worshipper of 
form; therefore thou hast a mirror in thy hand like the 
heavens. 

892. If thou shouldst taste a particle of thine own 
flavour, thou wouldst withdraw from this tastelessness. 

893. Renounce tyranny, take refuge in fidelity. 
What is mankind? Take refuge in God. 

894. Look at His goodness and follow His example; 
confess thine own sin. 

895. When thou prayest in shame, His bounty will 
be thy merciful helper. 

The story of the king who despaired, and of how he 
was forgiven 

896. A just ruler saw a tyrant in a dream. 

897. He said to him : “ How did God treat thee, the 
tyrant, on the night of thy death on account of thy 
tyranny? ” 

898. He answered : “ When my life ended, I looked 
upon all creation 

899. “ To see from whom I could expect guidance, or 
upon whom God had looked with favour. 

900. “ No man had any care for me in his heart; 
none had any thought of helping me. 

901. “I trembled like the willow; my face was 
covered with shame, and my heart was filled with despair. 

902. “ I gave up all my hopes and relied upon the 
forgiveness of God, 








THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


153 


903. “ Saying : ‘ 0 Thou, before whom I am hum¬ 
bled and ashamed, forgive the wretched and pass on. 

904. “ ‘ Although I have disobeyed Thy command, do 
not reject me, since I am rejected by all men. 

905. “ 1 Either punish me by fire, or do the contrary 
to what all others do.” 

906. “ When the Eriend saw me shamed before Him, 
the Eriend of the friendless aided me. 

907. ‘' My words moved the grace of His generosity ; 
He cast off my burden and raised me up.” 

908. Every remorseful breath drawn is a safeguard 
against the tumult of the day of resurrection. 

909. Oh thou, who weighest the wind, all thy words 
are but a measure of loss and scales for toil. 

910. Suppose that thou hadst had this measure of 
loss for years and for months, and that thou hadst lived 
through these months and these years, 

911. Thy scales are without weights and pearls; thy 
measure is empty, and thy span of life is full. 

912. Do not make the weight of the earth the stone in 
thy scales; do not make an amulet of the bead of clay. 

913. That to which thou art a slave, is but a silver 
coin ; that by which thou art alive, is but a breath. 

914. Give back that which thou takest from behind 
this veil; do not take it thyself, give what thou canst, 

915. Until that day when it will be well for thee to 
have thy neck free and thy mouth empty. 

(77) 916. The debts of orphans will not weigh thee down, 

and the burden of widows will not be on thy shoulder. 

917. Leave this old worn-out carpet; cast away this 
stained garment. 



154 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


918. Either take thy provision for the road like a 
stranger, or abandon the world like Nezami. 

SECOND DISCOURSE 
On advising the king to uphold justice 

919. Oh thou, whose judgment is the ruler of all who 
have life; oh thou, whose foot is the jewel of crowned 
kings, 

920. If thou art a king, seek a royal palace; if thou 
art a gem, seek the divine crown. 

921. From the world beyond which there is no road, 
and of which only thou and I have knowledge, 

922. Thou hast been regarded with the greatest favour 
by that Light which is cherished in eternity. 

923. Thou art a rare coin, and thy city is the world. 
All the currency of the world is thine, coin by coin. 

924. The empire with its affairs and authority is 
thine; be proud, this happiness is thine. 

925. Thy circle is wider than the circle of heaven; 
thou art worth more than both worlds. 

926. The dawn holds the mirror, only that thou 
mayest see thine own face. 

927. The motion of this cradle which is thy temple, 
is but to lull thee to a sweet sleep like a child. 

928. Thou art both the bird of the heart and the 
breath of life. If there is any like thee, it is thyieelf. 

(78) 929. The heart of the sun, which is full of fire, is 

happy, because it sees thy face. 

930. The moon, which wanes to the fineness of thy 
hair, laughs when she sees thy face. 

931. Enjoy the world, because thou art greater than 
all. Do not grieve; thou art not the slave of the world. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


155 


932. Be humble to all like the dust of the earth; be 
free of all like the wind. 

933. Earth is better alone by itself; wind-blown earth 
becomes dust. 

934. Give thy heart to God and be happy; this is a 
further kingdom for thee. 

935. Say : ‘ ‘ 'Where is the knowledge of religion and 
piety? Where are we, and where is trust?” 

936. News of the other side of the world is given to 
the heart which has received the mark of religion. 

937. Strive for religion, because thou hast the world, 
that thou mayest possess thyself of the other world also. 

938. Since religion cannot be bought with the things 
of this world, one should not listen to the orders and 
prohibitions of the devil. 

939. Every barleycorn weight of the essence of this 
amber is worth a stone of alchemy. 

940. Throw- away the stone and take the jewel; give 
the dust of the earth and take the gold. 

941. He who gives thee the provision for the road, 
takes one portion from thee and gives thee ten in 
exchange. 

942. There is no better investment than this; take 
thy profit; indeed thou canst not lose. 

943. Thy work is appointed to foster religion; just 
kings have acted in this way. 

944. To administer justice is right thinking. To be 
free from these people is the best calling. 

(79) 945. If thou art the benefactor of the city and the 

armv, the whole city and army will wish thee well. 

946. Tyranny destroys the empire. The empire en¬ 
dures by kindness to its subjects. 







156 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


947. There is a reckoning; come, and before that 
end observe thine own works and take warning. 

948. Seek peace for the people; why injure them ? 
What can be the result of injustice but shame? 

949. Reason is in a deep sleep of intoxication; the 
ship of prudence is in a whirlpool. 

950. Suppose that thou hast possessed thyself of the 
belongings of the weak; suppose that thou hast tyran- 
nously seized the goods of the orphans, 

951. On the day of resurrection which is the day of 
judgment, wilt thou not be ashamed of thy excuses? 

952. Turn thy face to religion, because it is a strong 
support; turn thy back to the sun, because it is worship¬ 
ping fire. 

953. This game of the golden ball is fatal like arsenic. 
Do not pursue games like a sick woman. 

954. Everything in this tent with nine pegs is the 
sport of this fatal game. 

955. Blow it out from thy mind as with the breath of 
the Messiah. Eree thine own oil from this lamp. 

956. How much longer, like a moth, wilt thou shed 
thy wings and throw 7 thy shield down before a lamp? 

957. Tear this fourth curtain, so that the wrings of 
Jesus may grow from thy feet. 

958. He who, like Jesus, gave up his life, truly con¬ 
quered the world. 

(80) 959. One cannot conquer the world by tyranny; one 

can gain empire by justice. 

960. What portion will injustice give to thee? In¬ 
justice gives thee to destruction. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


157 


961. Justice is a messenger of good tidings, gladdening 
wisdom. It is an agent which brings prosperity to the 
country. 

962. The empire endures through justice. Thy rule 
will be confirmed by thy justice. 


The story of Nushirvan and his visier 

963. Whilst hunting, the horse of Nushirvan carried 
him far away from the royal retinue. 

964. The only companion of the king was his minister ; 
the king and the minister were alone together. 

965. In that hunting ground the king saw a village, 
ruined like the heart of an enemy. 

966. Two birds were sitting close together; their dis¬ 
cussion was closer than the heart of the king. 

967. He said to the minister : “ What is their argu¬ 
ment? What is the meaning of their cries to one 
another? ” 

968. The minister said : “Oh, the king of the world, 
I will explain it, if the king would take a lesson. 

969. “ These two voices are not mere singing; they 
are the proclamation of a marriage ceremony. 

970. “ This bird lias given a daughter in marriage to 
that other bird and demands from him that the price of 
mother’s milk be settled in the morning, 

971. “ Saying : ‘ Leave this ruined village to us 
together with a few more like it.’ 

972. “ The other one answers, saying : ‘ Do not 
worry about this. See the tyranny of the king and do 
not grieve. 





158 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


973. ‘ If we have this same king and this destiny, 
in a short time I will give thee a hundred thousand 
ruined villages like this.’ ” 

974. These words had such an effect on the king, 
that he heaved a sigh and began to lament. 

975. He tore his hair and wept grievously v What can 
be the result of injustice but tears? 

976. He gnawed his finger at this oppression. He 
said : “ Look at the oppression which is known even to 
the birds. 

977. “ See my tyranny which leaves owls for the 
farmers instead of hens. 

978. “Oh, how negligent and worldly I have been! 
For this tyranny I shall have to suffer much regret. 

979. “ How long shall I take the property of the 
people by force? I am unmindful of death and the grave 
of to-morrow. 

980. “ How long shall I usurp? See how I am play¬ 
ing with my life. 

981. “ God gave me the empire, that I may not do 
that which is unworthy. 

982. “ My base metal is covered with gold; yet I 
do what is prohibited. 

983. Why should I spoil my good name by oppres¬ 
sion? I oppress others, alas! I oppress myself. 

984. “ May there be a truer justice in my heart. 
Let me be ashamed either before God or before myself. 

985. To-day I am the embodiment of oppression. 
Alas for the exposure of my to-morrow! 

986. “ My unproductive body is fuel. For this grief 
my heart burns for my heart. 



THE TBEASURY OF MYSTERIES 


159 s 


987. “ How long shall I raise the dust of injustice,, 

spill my own glory and the blood of others? 

(82) 988. “ On the day of resurrection, they will call me¬ 

in question for this spoilation. 

989. 11 I am shameless, if I am not humbled now.. 
My heart is of stone, if I do not grieve now. 

990. “ See how long I will suffer reproach, that I 
may bear this shame till the day of resurrection. 

991. “ That which bears me is, in truth, my burden. 
That which is my remedy is, indeed, my poison. 

992. “ Of these countless jewels and treasures, what 
did Sam take, and what did Feridun carry away? 

993. “ And of this pow’er and empire which is mine, 
what in the end shall I possess? ” 

994. The king became so heated over this matter, 
that the shoe of his horse melted from his haste. 

995. When he reached his camp and royal standard, 
the hope of kindness spread over the country. 

996. Immediately, he remitted the taxes on the over¬ 
taxed land. He abolished bad customs and the ways of 
injustice. 

997. He spread justice and destroyed tyranny, and to 
his last breath he remained faithful to this. 

998. He has gone, arid after many turns of the wheel 
of fortune, the fame of his justice remains. 

999. In the empire of the spiritually-minded, the die 
of his name bore the impress of justice. 

1000. He found a fortunate ending. He who knocked 
at the door of justice found this name. 

1001. Pass thy life in making hearts happy, that God 
may be pleased with thee. 


G 





160 


MAKHZANOL ASEAE 


1002. Seek the protection of the angels. Seek thine 
own toil and the comfort of thy friends. 

(83) 1003. Take away pain and give remedies, that thou 

mayest reach kingship. 

1004. Be warm in love and cold in revenge. Be 
generous like the moon and the sun. 

1005. The good that he did returned to him who 
began a good work. 

1006. As an analogy, the revolving dome knows what 
is due to good and to evil. 

1007. Devote thyself to prayer; turn thy face from 
sin, that thou mayest not make excuses like sinners. 

1008. Since life in this world is but an hour, spend 
that hour in devotion, because devotion is better than all. 

1009. Do not make excuses; they do not ask for wiles. 
These are only words; they demand actions from thee. 

1010. If matters could be simplified by words, the 
affairs of Nezami would reach heaven. 

THIRD DISCOURSE 
On the changing world 

1011. For a moment, oh master who art garbed in 
trailing robes, throw away the whole world. 

1012. Do not injure, be the comfort of the afflicted. 
For an hour, leave thy greatness behind. 

1013. Since the order is to think of the future, power 
is the slave of poverty. 

1014. Do not ask where is the empire of Solomon. 
The empire remains, but where is Solomon? 

1015. The bridal chamber is the same which Azra 
erected. The banquet is the same at which Vameq sat. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


161 


1016. That bridal chamber and that banquet are now 
departed. Vameq has fallen and Asra has departed. 

1017. Although the world has existed for many years,, 
it has not changed by a hair’s breadth. 

1018. The earth is the same powerful enemy. Heaven 
is the same fatal tyrant. 

(84) 1019. Who will desire to associate with the world?’ 

To whom has it been faithful, that it should keep faith 
with us? 

1020. He who lived on this earth, became dust. What 
does the dust know of who is in this dust? 

1021. Every rose petal is the cheek of a noble. Every 
step treads on the head of a prince. 

1022. Why are we old, who have given back our youth 
to the world? Because we are born of the world. 

1023. Sam, who had a Phoenix to care for his son, 
was young, though he had an old son. 

1024. The moving dome which is not permanent, 
desires nothing but what is contrary to thy wishes. 

1025. At times it makes thee the king of the living; 
at times it makes thee into the potter’s clay. 

1026. Upon this party-coloured carpet, everyone is in 
despair. 

1027. Those who live in the desert, say : “ How happy 
those who live in the sea.” 

1028. And he who suffers hardship in the sea, weaves 
spells for the pleasures of the desert. 

1029. Humanity is not immune from change; it has 
security for naught. 

1030. It is necessary to go with this caravan, to 
leave this litter, and to pass on. 




162 


MAlvHZANOL ASRAE 


1031. He who remains behind in this circle, is driven 
out of the city and the village. 

1032. The traveller, having a respite, is shown from 
far off in non-existence. 

(85) 1033. Give up empire, because it makes thee proud. 

What light will the darkness of this shadow give thee? 

1034. Thou art spending thy life in play; thou art 
playing to excess. 

1035. The revolution of this playful-seeming sphere 
did not allow thee time for play. 

1036. Before reason matured, negligence was plea¬ 
sant ; how beautiful it was ! 

1037. When the vision of reason reached its limit, 
the empire of happiness came to an end. 

1038. It is not wise to be negligent; negligence is part 

of insanity. 

1039. Do not sit heedlessly, scribble a few pages; if 
thou dost not write, sharpen thy pen. 

1040. Do not turn from association with the spiritually 
minded; do not take thy hand from the belt of the saints. 

1041. The thorn which is the associate of the rose, 
pours ambergris into the lap of the hyacinth. 

1042. On the day of judgment, when they present the 
book of our account, they will bring the desert into the 
arena, 

1043. Saying to it : Oh thou, who art mixed with the 
blood of the dumb animal, and oh thou, who hast drunk 
the heart’s blood of the weary, 

1044. “ How could thy sands have the water of life? 
Thou art the desert; thou hast not the blessings of the 
Euphrates.” 





the treasury of mysteries 163 

(86) 1045. The sand will lament, saying : “ I have drunk 

blood. Do not stone me ; I have not committed a murder. 

1046. “ I provided salt for a table ; I mixed with some 
hearts, 

1047. “ So that, when I embrace the saints, I shall 
become the intimate of the bracelet of the celestial 
maidens.” 

1048. When they pass judgment upon it, according to 

the decree of its nature, they will make it the minstrel 
wearing anklets in paradise. •' 

1049. He who chooses good associates, will neces¬ 
sarily profit by it some day. 

1050. Good associations have been removed from the 
world; the honeycomb has become the wasp’s nest. 

1051. Look at the world and see how, because of 
inhumanity, mankind is on his guard against mankind. 

1052. They have taken spiritual knowledge from man¬ 
kind ; they have taken humanity away. 

1053. Since the heavens revolt against the covenant 
of Solomon, he is human who is now invisible like a spirit. 

1054. I deemed it advisable to run away from whom¬ 
soever I associated with. 

1055. The shadow of no man had the glory of the 
Phoenix; I found no trace of fidelity in the friendship of 
any man. 

1056. What is the seed of culture? To sow fidelity. 
What are the rights of fidelity? To observe fidelity. 

105?. To the farmer who sows the seed comes the day 
when he eats of it. 



164 


MAKHZANOL ASBAB 


The story of Solomon and the farmer 

1058. One day, when Solomon was at liberty, his 
breath blew out a candle. 

(87) 1059. He transferred his court to the country. He 
set up his throne on this turquoise realm. 

1060. He saw an old farmer in such a state on that 
arid plain, that his heart was broken. 

1061. He had taken corn from his house and had 
cast it into the granary of divine generosity. 

1062. He was sowing seed in all directions. An ear 
of corn grew from each of his grains. 

1063. When he opened his bag of corn, he loosed the 
tongues of the birds of Solomon. 

1064. One said : “ Oh old man, be content, consume 
that which thou hast. 

1065. “ Thou art not a snare, do not scatter grain; 
do not contend vainly w T ith us. 

1066. “ Thou hast no spade, do not scratch the 
surface of the desert. Thou dost not find water, do not 
sow the seed of the farmer. 

1067. “ What harvest did we obtain, who cultivated 
a well irrigated land, 

1068. “ That thou shouldst produce anything in this 
parched waterless burning field? ” 

(88) 1069. The old man said : “Do not take offence at 
the answer; I am independent of the produce of earth 
and water. 

1070. “ Water and drought are no concern of mine. 
I sow the seed, but God helps the growth. 

1071. “ My water is the sweat of my body; my spade 
the tips of my fingers. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


165 


1072. “ I have no need for empire or lands. As long 
as I live, this is enough for me. 

1073. “ He who gives good tidings through me, gives 
me seven hundred grains for each grain that I sow. ’ ’ 

1074. Do not sow grain in company with Satan, so 
that every seed may produce seven hundred grains. 

1075. One must first sow good seed, that the ear of 
corn may ripen well. 

1076. Every created form has been endowed with a 
garment fitted to his stature. 

1077. Not every donkey can carry the garments of 
Christ. Not every one can be trusted with the secrets 
of the empire. 

1078. A rhinoceros can eat the neck of a,n elephant; 
an ant cannot consume more than the leg of a locust. 

1079. The sea is calm in spite of a hundred rivers; 
a spadeful makes the brook noisy. 

1080. In this circle of lapis lazuli, the position of 
every man accords with his worth. 

1081. It requires a fortunate patient man not to get 
tired of his burden. 

1082. Not every soul is worthy of grace; not every 
womb is pregnant with divine secrets. 

(89) 1083. I will not repeat it, because it shows inex¬ 

perience : the work of Nezami is to carry a load. 

FOURTH DISCOURSE 

On the good behaviour of kings to their subjects 

1084. Oh thou, who hast thrown down the shield of 
courage, thy refuge in alienation is thy demon. 





166 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1085. Thou art proud of an empire which has no 
permanence. Thou livest but with a transitory life. 

1086. Thou art unprotected from the wine of the 
drunkards; thou art the plaything of the games of the 
stars. 

1087. Thou hast cast away the book and the sword 
and hast exchanged them for the cup and the flagon. 

1088. Thou hast taken in thy hand the mirror and the 
comb to admire thy tresses like a beautiful woman. 

1089. See what Rabe’eh did to the dog of the seven 
men with her own tresses. 

1090. Oh thou, by w r hom merit is shamed, be shamed 
by the virtue of a widow. 

1091. How long wilt thou lay claim to courage? 
Boast less, boast less, because thou art less than a woman. 

1092. Reason cannot dispense with virtue. No virtue 
is greater than justice. 

1093. This water was refreshed but not in thy stream. 
The mole was beautiful, but not on thy cheek. 

1094. Thou art not heaven, approve of good decrees. 
Fear high heaven greatly. 

1095. One should display only pure gems; one can 
make a good profit on this capital. 

1096. It brings misfortune to do injustice, to dis¬ 
honour oneself, and to shed the blood of others. 

1097. Much has been claimed before now to bring 
together some great spirits. 

1098. Do justice and fear the spirit of men. Fear the 
arrow of the complaints of the oppressed. 

1099. Do not despise the spirit when it turns to God, 
because it has great results. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


167 


1100. See what the unclean spirits of those two men 
did to Mahmud’s body ; 

1101. Then see what the spirit of so many pure souls 
will do with thee on the day of judgment. 

1102. The travellers who follow the angels, are not 
slower than the tortoise on the road of inspiration. 

1103. Remove the sword of injustice from their path, 
that thou mayest not suffer their complaints by night. 

1104. Justice is the condition of sovereignty. Behold 
the condition of the world which is injustice. 

1105. He who did justice in this house for one night, 
adorned his house for the morrow. 

The story of the old woman and Sultan Sanjar 

1106. An old woman suffered injustice; she laid hold 
on the skirt of Sanjar, 

1107. Saying : “ Oh king, I have seen little of thy 
justice, and all the year long I have suffered thy tyranny. 

1108. “ A drunken watchman came down my street 
and kicked me sorely. 

1109. “ I was innocent, but he forced me from my 
house and dragged me to the end of the street by my hair. 

1110. “ He abused me shamefully and placed the seal 
of oppression on the door of my house. 

1111. “ He said : ‘ Oh hunchback, who killed such a 
one at midnight in thy street? ’ 

1112. “ He searched my house, saying : ‘ Where is 
the murderer? ’ Oh king, what humiliation could ex¬ 
ceed this? 

1113. “ When the watchman is intoxicated, a murder 
is committed. Why should he violently accuse an old 
woman ? 






168 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1114. “ The drunkards consume the revenue of the 
country ; they carry off old women on false accusations. 

1115. “ He who has condoned this tyranny, has 
destroyed my honour and thy justice. 

1116. “My wounded breast was smitten; there is 
nothing left of me, body or soul. 

1117. “ Oh king, if thou dost not do me justice, it 
will be counted against thee on the day of judgment. 

1118. “ Thou art a judge, I see in thee no justice; 
I cannot acquit thee of tyranny. 

1119. “ Strength and help come from kings. Bee 
what misery comes to us from thee. 

(92) 1120. “ It is not right to seize the goods of orphans. 

Cease from it; this is not the usage of nobility. 

1121. “ Do not rob an old woman of her trifles; be 
shamed by the grey hairs of an old woman. 

1122. “ Thou art a slave, and thou claimest sove¬ 
reignty. Thou art not a king, when thou workest de¬ 
struction. 

1123. “ The king who attends to the affairs of his 
kingdom, passes just judgment on his subjects, 

1124. “ So that they may all obey his commands and 
love him in their hearts and souls. 

1125. “ Thou hast turned the world upside down. In 
all thy life what good deeds hast thou really done? 

1126. “ The rise of the Empire of the Turks was 
due to their love of justice. 

1127. “ Since thou fosterest injustice, thou art not a 
Turk, thou art a plundering slave. 





the treasury of mysteries 


169 


1128. “ The houses of the town-dwellers have been 
ruined by thee. The harvest of the villagers has been 
ravaged by thee. 

1129. “ Reckon with the coming of death. Protect 
thyself whilst thou canst 

1130. “ Thy justice is the lamp illuminating thy 
night. The companion of thy to-morrow is to-day. 

1131. “ Give the old woman joy by thy words, and 
remember this word of an old woman. 

1132. “ Withdraw thy hand from the wretched, that 
the arrows of the sorrowful may not wound thee. 

1133. " How long wilt thou shoot arrows in every 
direction? Thou knowest not the spiritual power of the 
poor 

1134. “ Thou art a key to the conquest of the world. 
Thou wast not created for injustice. 

1135. “ Thou art a king to lessen tyranny, and if 
others wound, thou shouldst heal. 

1136. “ The relation of the poor to thee is that of 
the beloved to the lover. Thy relation to them should 
be to foster them. 

1137. “ Beg at the door of the saints and protect the 
poor. ’ ’ 

1138. Sanjar who had won the empire of Khorasan, 
suffered loss when he disregarded these words. 

1139. Justice has vanished in our time; she has taken 
up her abode on the wings of the Phcenix. 

1140. There is no respect under this blue dome ; no 
honour remains on this suspended earth. 

1141. Arise Nezami, thou exceedest all limits. Thou 
woundest the bleeding heart. 






170 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


FIFTH DISCOURSE 
On the description of old age 

1142. How quickly the sweet day of life reached its 
evening. Dust and wind came together and fire and 
water. 

1143. Morning has come, why art thou drunken with 
sleep? The sun has passed the top of the wall. 

1144. Abandon this pursuit of conquest. Do not 
pretend to youth, old age is here. 

1145. That heart which was wounded by grief, is dry ; 
it has no longer its former savour. 

(94) 1146. Reason is darkened, and judgment is destroyed ; 

the hand is blistered, and the foot is weary. 

1147. Earth desires to bestow favours upon thee; 
withdraw thy foot; it is the time of rest. 

1148. In this purity and pollution, there is no better 
comfort than ease. 

1149. The source of thy moonlight has grown cold. 
Thy cheeks which were fresh like tulips, are yellow. 

1150. Black and white have fought with every part 
of thy body, from head to foot. 

1151. Time which is thy night and day, teaches thee 
during thy youth. 

1152. There were many younger than thee in the 
world who desired not to grow old. 

1153. The wind of autumn carried away the petals of 
his rose; age came and carried off his youth. 

1154. They have not found fault with youth. There 
is a saying : “ Old age and a hundred faults.” 

1155. Even though the kingdom be the kingdom of 
Jamshid, white hair is the sign of despair. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


171 


1156. White hair brings the message of death; the 
bent back brings greetings from death. 

1157. Who possesses the empire of youth and beauty? 
It is not mine, oh Lord, tell me whose it is. 

1158. Youth has passed in negligence. It is lament¬ 
able, lament therefore. 

1159. If the lost beloved is a Joseph, the loss is 
grievous. 

1160. Thou knowest not the value of youth ; thou wilt 
not know it, until thou art old. 

1161. The young tree is the pride of the garden ; when 
it is old, the gardener cuts it down. 

1162. Although youth is itself all fire, age is bitter, 
and youth is sweet. 

1163. The new shoot bears the early rose; the dry 
wood is for the fire. 

1164. Black hair is the beauty of the head. The black 
stone is the touchstone for gold. 

1165. The days of youth come to an end. Awake, 
night has passed, and morning has come, awake. 

1166. When camphor subdued the fire of thy nature, 
it changed the nature of thy musk into that of camphor. 

1167. When the weather is cold for a time, the black 
cloud brings the white snow. 

1168. Bleaching and dyeing go together. The sun 
and the Messiah live in the same sphere. 

1169. The quality of water is to bleach; the function 
of the moon is to colour. 

1170. This blue dome loves changing colour, therefore 
Jesus practised the dyer’s art. 

1171. Since the air has no colour, it has no weight. 






172 


MAKHZANOL ASEAE 


(96) 1172. Do not be party-coloured like day and night; do 
not have a white face and black cheeks. 

1173. So long as thou seekest hypocrisy, thou bearest 
the brand of ignorance and darkness. 

1174. On the mountain, the leopard is wounded 
through the duality of his colour. 

1175. So long as, like the young trees, thou clothest 
thyself at times in silk and at times in rags, 

1176. Through this contradictory nature thou hast an 
armour : in the summer thou hast a hundred warm 
garments, and in the winter thou art naked. 

1177. Eat and drink that which thou canst obtain 
all the year round like the lion and the leopard. 

1178. So long as thou hast a loaf of bread and a 
draught of water, do not stretch out thy hand to every 
bowl. 

1179. If thou hast not enough bread to satisfy thy 
hunger, who can keep from thee water and herbs? 

1180. It is better to eat grass, like the ass of Jesus, 
than to beg bread from others. 

1181. The fire of the dust of the curve of this whirl¬ 
wind will not give bread, unless it takes away man’s 
honour. 

1182. If in this tower of the imprisoned dead, the fire 
of the spiritually enlightened gave no heat, 

1183. Why should a wolf be the Joseph of its soul? 
And why should the lion-hearted be the cat begging at 
its table? 

(97) 1184. Do not grind the grain of thy heart like barley 
and wheat for the sake of a handful of false wheat. 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


173 


1185. Make a relish, like water, of thine own breast 
for thy bread, and, like fire, roast the flesh of thine own 
heart. 

1186. Eat dust rather than eat the bread of the miser. 
Thou art not dust, do not suffer the wound of the base. 

1187. Pierce thy heart and hand with the thorn of 
toil. Do not seek comfort; put thy hand to work. 

1188. It is good that thou shouldst work, so that thou 
mayest not beg from others. 

The story of the old brickmaker 

1189. Somewhere in Syria lived an old man who, like 
a fairy, shunned mankind. 

1190. He wove his shirt of grass. He made bricks and 
earned a livelihood thus. 

1191. When the warriors laid down their arms, they 
made those bricks their shield in the grave. 

1192. He who had only those bricks to cover his grave, 
even though he were a sinner, was not punished. 

1193. One day the old man was hard at work at this 
calling. 

1194. By chance there came to him a handsome youth, 

1195. Saying : “ What humiliation and degradation 
is this? Brickmaking is work for an ass. 

1196. “ Arise, and do not strike thy sword upon the 
shield of the dust. They will not grudge thee a loaf of 
bread. 

(98) 1197. “Throw this mould into the fire; make thy 

bricks with some other mould. 

1198. “ How long wilt thou painfully dig clods from 

the earth? Why dost thou spend thy time on clay and 
water ? 





174 


MAKHZANOL ASEAB 


1199. “ Remember that thou art aged ; leave the work 
of youth to the young.” 

1200. The old man said : ‘‘ Do not be foolish; do not 
interfere. Do not consider thyself important. 

1201. “ The aged make bricks; captives carry loads. 

1202. “ I have put my hand to this profession of mine, 
that I might not one day have to stretch out my hand 
to thee. 

1203. ‘‘ I beg for treasure from none. I eat my daily 
bread through the work of mine own hands. 

1204. “ Do not trouble me for this my daily bread. 
If this is not so, may it be forbidden me.” 

1205. The young man went away weeping, because of 
the reproachful words of the old man. 

1206. This old man was experienced, and his work 
was acceptable. 

1207. How long, oh Nezami, wilt thou knock at the 
door of this world? Arise, and knock at the door of reli¬ 
gion, if thou wishest to knock. 

SIXTH DISCOURSE 
On the importance of creation 

1208. There is an artist behind this curtain ; otherwise 
who could have shown these scenes on it? 

1209. Make the eye of thy heart familiar with this 
curtain to perceive that which comes from behind this veil. 

1210. Behind this blue curtain, he has countless 
instruments. 

1211. They have lit the gems of their eyes in reverence 
and have sewn them on the girdle of their heart’s service. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


175 


(99) 1212. There is nothing on any point of this circle, 
which is not working on the line of its circumference. 

1213. These steeds which are saddled, are chosen for 
us. 

1214. Before the movement of this new creation, and 
before the new travellers and the old voices, 

1215. Had we not built the foundation of love? Had 
we not been nourished by love? 

1216. There are evil and good in both worlds; and 
they have tied both to thy saddle strap. 

1217. There is no companion for the world like thee; 
the bird of the world has no better grain than thee. 

1218. Leave this bird which is injurious to nature. Be 
above this bird like the Phoenix. 

1219. The bird, thy Messiah, has wings beneath thee 
and is above thee. 

(100) 1220. Either extricate its claws from the cage; or 
entrust thine own cage to it, 

1221. That, when it carries the baggage to its destina- 
- tion, it may carry thee on its protecting wings. 

1222. When thou passest beyond these spheres of dust, 
they cleanse thy tablet of thee. 

1223. Thou wilt transcend alteration. Thou wilt be 
entrusted with the divine secret. 

1224. Thou wilt walk with ease in step with the 
prophets; thou wilt be initiated into the divine temple. 

1225. The two stages of the two worlds are but half 
a stage of one breath of the Heart. 

1226. He who laid thy foundations on this clay , made 
the sanctuary of the soul in the temple of the Heart. 





176 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1227. Beceive the picture of acceptance from the en¬ 
lightened Heart; expect naught from the black carpet of 
the body. 

1228. The mor ni ng breeze draws collyrium to the eye 
of the narcissus. Alchemy dyes the garment in copper. 

1229. What is the body? It is a handful of clay. 
Only the Heart counts, because the Word is in the Heart. 

1230. Be the slave of the Heart, that thou mayest be 
a king, the master of reason, and the ruler of the soul. 

1231. If thou seekest a heart as soft as the fur of the 
fox, give thy body to hardship like musk. 

1232. Oh thou, who hast no garment better than sack¬ 
cloth, authority comes not from silk and brocade. 

(101) 1233. The beauty of the gazelle is in the roughness of 

its skin; therefore it is chosen to carry messages of love. 

1234. Musk remains in rough parchment and escapes 
from silk. 

1235. If thou art sugar, be content with compression ; 
if thou art a pearl, be content with a hard shell. 

1236. Sometimes be like a ruby dawn, ending the 
night; sometimes, like the dawn, be the target of sighs. 

1237. Endure the burden of distress in the pitch dark 
night; the greater the distress, the greater the favour. 

1238. Those faithful ones who reached their destina¬ 
tion, reached it along the path of affliction. 

1239. The gift of calamity is the happiness of the 
prophets, and that which gives thee happiness is calamity. 

1240. The wound of calamity is the remedy of selfish¬ 
ness ; the bitterness of wine is the essence of its sweetness. 

1241. The dragons are the guardians of treasures, and 
discomfort guards the treasure of ease. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


177 


1242. Be a cypress and be free from thy fetters. Be 
a candle and be happy in consuming thyself. 

1243. Toil is the remedy of complaint, and beyond 
every toil there is rest. 

1244. Providence will not bring trouble upon thee, 
unless it takes other troubles from thee. 

1245. On the journey -which leads to freedom, the 
guardian grief is the fore-runner of happiness. 


The story of the dog, the hunter, and the fox 

1246. There was a hunter who had wonderfully sharp 
sight. He travelled far and wide in the desert. 

(102) 1247. He had such a courageous dog that, when it 

ran, it outpaced the sun. 

1248. The rhinoceros went in terror of its strength; 
the wild ass, of its devouring teeth. 

1249. On his travels, it was his companion and friend ; 
it would work for him night and day. 

1250. Love burnt in his heart for it; it was his guar¬ 
dian by night and provided his daily bread. 

1251. That lion-dog was lost to the brave man; the 
man feared that the dog had been destroyed. 

1252. He said : “In this perilous journey, the price 
of a dog’s foot is a lion’s head.” 

1253. Although this grief broke his heart, yet he bore 
it with patience. 

1254. He was patient beyond bearing; each grain of 
his patience earned him a dram of profit. 

(103) 1255. A fox came to him from a distance, mocking 

him, and said : “Do not be patient, oh impatient one ; 




178 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1256. “ I hear that swift runner is dead. May your 
life be long, though the dog has disappeared. 

1257. “ Last night when he left you to hunt, he ran 
swiftly and vanished. 

1258. “ This which the dog caught for thee to-day, 
must suffice thee for two months, oh brave man. 

1259. “ Arise and make roast meat of thy heart, eat 
the kernel and give the husk to the poor. 

1260. “ Formerly thou hadst rich food ; now thou wilt 
no longer eat fat foxes. 

1261 ' 1 Thou art now without the fat of our limbs , 

thy nature is free from our bile. 

1262. “ Thou art separated from him ; what fidelity is 
this? Thou dost not grieve; what love is this? ” 

1263. The hunter said to the fox : “ The night is still 
pregnant; this one day’s grief is mine. 

1264. “I rejoice that in this narrow house neither 
happiness nor sorrow will last. 

1265. “ All this mastery and servitude exist in this 
revolving sphere. 

1266. “ The stars and the heavens revolve; ease and 
toil will pass away. 

1267. “lam happy that my heart is grieved, since 
grief is the cause of happiness. 

1268. “ My wolf suffered the fate of Joseph. I am 
" not a wolf ; I will not rend my garment. 

1269. “ If they have taken it from me, oh deceitful 
one, they will bring it back with a prey like thee.” 

(104) 1270. He was still speaking when dust arose, and 

the dog appeared through the veil of dust. 







the treasury of mysteries 


179 


1271. It came and ran round and round him; it 
caught hold of the fur of the fox with its teeth. 

1272. The dog said : “ Excuse me that I came late; 
the fox knows that I came like a lion. 

1273. “ My return enhanced thy faith; the helpless¬ 
ness of the fox is an assurance to thee.’ 

1274. His affairs will end happily who is drawn by 
assurance to the divine purpose. 

1275. Seek the path of assurance in everything; 
nothing is more blessed than this stage of the road. 

1276. The foot becomes the head on the path of 
assurance ; the stone becomes gold in the eye of assurance. 

1277. If thy footsteps are firm in assurance, thou wilt 
get dust from the sea and moisture from fire. 

1278. He who united assurance to trust, wrote on 
generosity : “ God will give sustenance.” 

1279. He was no fly on another man’s food; he 
accepted wdiatever came to him. 

1280. Thy sustenance will not be taken from thee; 
do the work of God and be not anxious for thy daily bread. 

1281. Go to His door, because He is better than they. 
Ask thy sustenance of Him, because He gives thy daily 
bread. 

1282. No one of us who begged at that door, returned 
empty-handed. 

1283. Those who have assurance, are a different race ;. 
we are the feet, and they are the head. 

1284. When they spread their prayer carpet on the 
water, they change the pure wine into honey. 

1285. Since life is not assured to thee for a day, why 
shouldst thou lay in a provision for a hundred years? 








180 


IvlAKHZANOL A SEAR 


<(105) 1286. When they created us, they apportioned our 

daily bread to us in eternity. 

1287. Since they have sent thee thy daily bread from 
thence, thou consumest here only thy portion. 

1288. Although many have striven in this world, who¬ 
ever ate more than his portion ? 

1289. Strive to excel in faith, because this is thy 
covenant; sustenance and wealth are not increased by 
effort. 

1290. It requires thy effort and God’s grace to make 

—' thee more precious than the whole world. 

1291. The effort of Nezami was not strenuous; divine 
favour prospered him. 

SEVENTH DISCOURSE. 

On the superiority of mankind over animals 

1292. Oh thou, who on earth are beloved like the 
heaven, thy lovers are both earth and heaven. 

1293. Thy work, since thou hadst knowledge, was 
greater than thou couldst imagine. 

1294. At the beginning, thou didst not take milk but 
sugar from that nurse who brought thee up. 

1295. Thou shouldst have greater beauty. What 
beauty is greater than this? 

1296. Because of the brush which they used, they 
have made of thee a beautiful picture. 

1297. They have tied the cord of life to thy heart, and 
they have girt thy waist with the jewel of the body. 

(106) 1298. It is better for thee to be weak, because in this 

meadow a fat gazelle cannot keep pace with a lean one. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


181 


1299. The living creatures which are thy slaves, are 
the birds in thy snare. 

1300. Since thou art a Phoenix, be the glory of the 
work; eat little, say little, and harm none. 

1301. Whatever thou mayest see in creation, is work¬ 
ing in this workshop. 

1302. The owl which is known as the bird of ill-omen, 
is the nightingale of the treasure of the ruin. 

1303. Whatever exists on this curtain, is worthy of a 
body and has a value for its life. 

1304. Though they have fewer gems from thy sea than 
thou, like thee they are the jewels of this world. 

1305. When thou bringest into account the idea of 
_less and more, expect to pay damage according to the 

injury. 

1306. The good and the evil in this world are for thy 
use ; in good and in evil they hold up a mirror to thee. 

1307. If thou shouldst give shoes, they will give thee 
a hat. If thou exposest the secrets of others, they will 
expose thy secrets as does the moon. 

1308. Arise, do not, like the dawn, divulge the secrets 
of others, so that the keeper of thy secrets may be like the 
night. 

1309. The veil of the bee is the petal of the rose, and 
thine is this lace curtain of heaven. 

(107) 1310. How long wilt thou fly for food like a fly into 

this spider’s web? 

1311. The veiled ones who own the world, hid thy 
secret behind the curtain. 

1312. Thou didst come out from behind that curtain, 
therefore thy secrets were unveiled. 





182 


MAKHZANOL A SEAR 


1313. Do not even bid farewell to the heart which is 
outside the veil; lend no ear to that which is not behind 
the veil. 

1314. The actor who is behind this curtain, did not 
tie this veil on thy head without reason. 

1315. Do not hold to anything but this curtain. Do 
not play any melody except this tune. 

1316. Listen to this melody and awake; be entrusted 
with the mysteries behind the veil. 

1317. Thou couldst make thy body purer than the 
soul, if thou wouldst imprison it for forty days. 

1318. Man is honoured by imprisonment; for this 
reason Joseph lay in prison. 

1319. One cannot find the value of the heart and the 
dignity of the soul except by discipline. 

1320. Entrust the silver of nature to discipline; pro¬ 
duce the gold of nature by discipline, 

1321. So that through discipline thou mayest reach 
a state where thou wilt be drawn from humiliation to 
glory. 

(108) 1322. When thou hast broken in the wild horse of 

nature, the coin of sincerity will be minted in thy name. 

1323. When reason and nature become thy friends, 
the story of the ironsmith and the perfumer is true. 

1324. One will blister thy face with heat, and one will 
perfume thee with the scent of ambergris. 

1325. The baggage of nature holds no salvation. In 
the cage of the bird there is little life. 

1326. That which is contrary to habit, is the leader of 
the caravan of happiness. 





the treasury of mysteries 


183 


1327. To turn away from lust is sovereignty; to 
abandon it altogether is prophetic power. 

1328. If for an instant desire is under thy control, 
then bring the shoes, because paradise is thine. 

1329. Jangle the bells of lust; be the servant of faith, 
not the hireling of the devil. 

1330. Fly for safety to the sanctuary of religion, that 
thou mayest be free of care on the day of resurrection. 

1331. The perfume of the Prophet is the guardian of 
Bu Taleb from the raging fire of hell. 

1332. Truly, the benevolence of the blessed is the 
protecting armour of the saints. 


The story of Feridun and the gazelle 

1333. One day, Feridun went out sight-seeing with 
some of his friends. 

1334. When he arrived at the hunting ground, he 
saw a little gazelle which attracted him. 

(109) 1335. Its neck and its ears disarmed enmity; its eyes 

and its buttocks interceded for it. 

1336. Attracting the king’s eye, it seemed as though 
it had sprung from the king’s vision. 

1337. The king was so much attracted to that quarry, 
that he was completely enslaved by it. 

1338. In the pursuit, his horse became as hot as his 
heart; he made the arch of his bow as soft as the belly 
of the gazelle. 

1339. Notwithstanding his efforts, the arrow missed 
it; even at that pace the horse did not reach its dust. 




184 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1340. Feridan said to his arrow : “ Where is thy 
revengeful feather ? ’ ’ and to his horse : ‘ ‘ Where is thy 
swift gallop? ” 

1341. “ Ye are not this time what ye both were 
before ; ye are small compared with that little grass-eater.” 

1342. The arrow spoke : ‘‘Oh Lord, this poor wretch 
is the object of thy gaze. 

1343. ‘‘It runs under the protection of thy armour; 
who can strike upon thy armour with an arrow? 

1344. ‘‘It is not fitting that the object of the gaze 
of the great should be touched except by the hand of the 
minstrel.” 

1345. Seek the brand of the great, oh wise man, that 
thou mayest be great through their brand. 

(HO) 1346. Service is the attribute of humanity; to serve 
is the glory of mankind. 

1347. In the eyes of the spiritually minded, there is 
no service more acceptable than fidelity. 

1348. Lay the hand of faithfulness on the girdle of 
fidelity; strive not to break faith. 

1349. The serpent guarding the treasure is not poor; 
yet it is but a girdle from head to tail. 

1350. Heaven is the crown of the head, because the 
whole of it is a girdle for service. 

1351. Whoso holds the reins of virtue, is girt for the 
road of service. 

1352. The candle which became the ruler of light 
gamed this lordship through the service of the bee. 

1353. Arise, oh Nezami, because thou hast not girded 
thy loins. What effort hast thou made to serve? 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


185 


EIGHTH DISCOURSE 
On creation 

1354. Before the forerunners of existence had drunk 
water from the sea of munificence, 

1355. There was no right or left hand on this king¬ 
dom. There was no dust on the road of this earth. 

1356. The promise of delay had not come to its end. 
No manifestation had come out from behind the curtain. 

1357. Night and day had no sign of humility; the 
soul and the body were not combined for existence. 

1358. The elements still struggled together; the laws 
of balance were not yet manifest. 

(Ill) 1359. The grace of generosity showed benevolence 
and let one drop fall from its sea. 

1360. By that one drop, this blue heaven immediately 
began to revolve. 

1361. They raised dust from the running water; they 
produced thine essence from that accident. 

1362. When thou arisest from this work-shop, it will 
be as dust arising from the road. 

1363. How beautiful was that moment when thou 
wast not; thy picture was unpainted, and thy soul existed 
without thee ! 

1364. The eye of heaven was free from this search ; 
the ear of the earth was free from these discussions. 

1365. So long as thou didst not tread this road, 
existence was full of gratitude to non-existence. 

1366. Night and day were free from the trouble of 
thy pregnancy. Vegetation was unfertile, and nature 
was mature. 





186 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1367. The garden of the world was not troubled by 
the thorn; the earth did not suffer disturbing dust. 

1368. The fortune of the Gemini who had girded 
their loins, was free from the opening of thy vein. 

1369. When the moon was eclipsed, it was not dis¬ 
graced in the earth by the beating of thy tray. 

1370. Venus had not yet been dishonoured on this 
clay, and the pinions of the angel Harut had not yet 
been shed in Babylon. 

(112) 1371. Earth and heaven were without thee. Thou 
wast absent, but the care for thee existed. 

1372. When the decree of the universe was renewed 
through thee, the turquoise dome resounded with thy 
fame. 

1373. The star did not escape thy evil eye. The 
pageantry of the cradle of the stars was broken. 

1374. The month and the year were without move¬ 
ment, until thou knewest their secret. 

1375. The face of the world which was a clear mirror, 
was darkened by these breaths. 

1376. Thou tookest the torch of dawn to the evening 
and didst call it false and true. 

1377. May the dust of the earth be in tbe mouth of 
heaven, because it has girt its loins in thy service. 

1378. In heaven they call thee the fruit of the soul. 
Listen, because these are spoken words. 

1379. Alas, that thy crown is better than thy head, 
the covering better than the dog, the nosebag better than 
the ass. 

(113) 1380. There was much boasting in this world, that 
the world is not worth to thee so much as a grain of 
barley on the dust of the road. 





the treasury oe mysteries 


187 


1381. Thou wouldst exchange a soul for a handful of 
dust; thou givest a whole world for a particle of clay. 

1382. Oh thou, by whom the face of the earth is 
troubled, it is better that like a treasure thy place should 
be under the earth. 

1383. The oil of thy brain which is like quicksilver, 
is frozen by this world. 

1384. So that it may not confine thee as in a hazel 
nut, abandon this world. 

1385. Day and night are not ermine and sable; this 
dappled stoat is really a dragon. 

1386. Thou art not a cat; do not stretch out thy hand. 
Do not dally with the worthless fickle woman. 

1387. The lion has slavered on this road; why dost 
thou bend down thy head to the water like a stag? 

1388. If heaven shows thee water, do not be deceived ; 
it is a mirage. 

1389. Do not gallop swiftly, thinking thou hast seen 
the water of heaven. Drink the water of thy mouth, 
because what thou hast seen is only salt. 

(114) 1390. Make a plan, that thou mayest not'be thirsty. 

Be like tabashir, which is obtained by burning the 
tabashir canes. 

1391. So long as thy Joseph was out of the pit, his 
gaze was on divine Egypt. 

1392. Thou earnest from the blue heaven with yellow 
cheeks, when thou didst fall into this pit. 

1393. The vinegar of thy eyebrow was not a remedy 
-for all thy bile and for thy yellow face. 

1394. Since thy fat had grown for a hundred years, 
—-how could it be cured by the vinegar of thy eyebrow, 

which is but ten years old? 





188 


MAKHZANOL ASRAB 


1395. Thou hast seen the blood of thy father on these 
seven battlefields. Do not dishonour thyself for these 
seven loaves. 

1396. Thou art setting fire to thine own harvest; 
thou art striking blows at thine own fortune. 

1397. Gallop and urge on thy steed, because the arena 
is thine. Give orders, because the command is thine. 

1398. During these few days of life in which thou 
holdest the cup, eat well, sleep well, and rest well. 

1399. Truly, it was an act of great tyranny to set 
thee free from that rope so lightly. 

(115) 1400. Thy feet are fettered, and thy back is bent; 

yet thou art still frying in thine own fat; 

1401. Therefore thou art here the fuel of the kitchen 
fire; on the day of resurrection thou wilt be the brush¬ 
wood burnt in hell. 

1402. Even supposing that this belly of thine is full 
of water and of bread, oh fool, thou wilt then be worth 
no more. 

1403. If a man could lengthen his life through eating 
more, then he who eats most would live longest. 

1404. Life is (short, therefore it is precious. The 
value of life lies in its brevity. 

1405. Eat little and see what great ease thou wilt 
have; eat much and see the great discomfort. 

1406. What has thy reason to do with thy food? 
Only thy greed sets thee to this work. 

1407. Thy greed is impatient to do mischief. Aban¬ 
don this fool who deceives the intelligent. 

1408. As opposed to thy greed, they have given thee 
reason, that thou mayest not eat what is not given thee. 








THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


189 


1409. I fear that this work to which greed puts thee, 
will turn thee to its own colour. 

1410. Every good and every evil in this world receives 
colour from the other. 

The story of the fruitseller and the fox 

1411. A fruitseller who lived in Yaman, had a small 
fox to guard his goods. 

1412. It kept good watch on the road and guarded the 
warehouse of the greengrocer. 

(116) 1413. A thief played many tricks, but none of his 

arts availed here. 

1414. To hurry matters he closed his eyes. He slept 
and by sleeping induced the fox to sleep. 

1415. When the fox saw that the wolf was asleep, 
sleep overcame it, and it laid down its head. 

1416. The thief saw in that sleep his opportunity to 
take the purse; he came and plundered it. 

1417. He who sleeps on this road, loses either his 
head or his hat. 

1418. Arise Nezami; it is not the time to sleep; it is 
the time to say farewell to all. 

NINTH DISCOURSE 
On the abandonment of worldly dignities 

1419. Oh thou, who art more precious than the night 
of union, whose shadow is lighter than the dawn, 

1420. How long wilt thou sit in sorrow like a shadow ? 
Arise, for a banner is better when it is raised. 

1421. When kings intend to start on a journey, they 
send their baggage on before them. 




190 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1422. If thou art a, king, resolve to start on the road; 
prepare for a better journey. 

1423. Send thy baggage on before thee; send on thy 
provision for to-morrow now. 

1424. Because of the prudence of the bee, its hive is 
full of honey. 

1425. The ants which manfully draw up in line, carry 
provisions for the morrow. 

1426. The heedless man, unless he is blind, is not 
below that bee and this ant. 

1427. He who wishes to enjoy worldly comfort, should 
lay in provision in summer for the winter. 

(117) 1428. Except thee and me, all who obey this instinct, 

are dealers in jewels of an hour. 

1429. No man’s spirit thinks of the future; no man’s 
vision sees more than the moment. 

1430. Our abode which is higher than the heavens, 
is the abode of foresight. 

1431. No matter how and where I search, no one has 
greater foresight than we. 

1432. Though the pleasures of the moment are 
sweeter than life, they are less sweet than the pleasures 
of foresight. 

1433. We who know the secrets of the heart, are 
jewellers, though we are made of clay. 

1434. We have a sign of what is to come, and we 
know the past. 

1435. We have read carefully from this table of clay 
the minute subtleties of the lesson of the nine spheres. 

1436. No one bears our brand; we weip the first 
fruits of this garden. 









THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


191 


1437. On that day, when they sifted thy dust, they 
compounded it for the elixir of the heart. 

1438. With great pain and trouble thy dust is mixed; 
in the heart of this dust there are many treasures. 

1439. Eecognise the due value of this dust; worship^ 
the dust, oh ungrateful one. 

1440. From thy coming and going to this place, learn 
the road to thine own abode. 

1441. What is the purpose of thy coming on this 
journey? What is the wisdom of returning thence? 

(118) 1442. In the beginning, when this empire did not 

bear thy name, and this ruined village was not thine 
abode, 

1443. Thou didst possess the glory of the angelic 
Phoenix ; thou flewest in the zenith of heaven. 

1444. Though the power of the wing of thy love had 
no hounds, the eternal way, too, had no limit. 

1445. Thou wast weary and earnest to this earth ; 
thou threwest thy shadow onto this clay; 

1446. And again, when thou art tired of this prison, 
thou wilt tread on the skirt of the sun. 

1447. Though thou mayest leave all behind thee, thou 
wilt still go forward. 

1448. Thy work is only to progress; thou wilt not 
settle on one line. 

1449. In the time of generosity, thou art generous; 
thou art new and old in existence. 

1450. Leave this mother who kills her children; heed 
what the father has said to thee. 

1451. Look to thy father, oh simple minded man ; 
hold to his traditions and see what he did. 


H 






192 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1452. One cannot expect ease and comfort, because 
it is not obtainable in this life. 

1453. If one moment of life were according to one’s 
heart’s desires, one’s wasted life could return again. 

(119) 1454. Grieve and pass on. Art thou made from other 
clay? What reason hast thou for happiness? 

1455. Be content, it is not to me or to thee that 
Providence said: “Be happy.’’ 

1456. We were created for toil and for profitless dis¬ 
course. 

1457. On my life ! We do not deem the give and take 
of the world to be real. 

_... 1458. Why is thy face red like wine because of thy 

coming? Since all who come must depart. 

1459. How long will there be this compulsory arrival 
and departure? 

1460. It cannot be doubted that non-existence is 
nothingness; the doubt is in existence which is also 
nothingness. 

1461. Do not fly swiftly, since thou earnest slowly; 
do not go quickly, because thou earnest with difficulty. 

1462. A time will come when the trumpet will sound ; 
they will stamp our die on a new coin. 

1463. They will refresh the drooping rose; they will 
bring together that which was scattered. 

1464 . Oh thou, who art not ashamed of to-day, at least 

be ashamed of that other day. 

(120) 1465. For all these troubles which lie before us, for 
this patience of our wounded hearts, 

1466. Religion is our only remedy and the only steed 
for this desert. 






t he treasury of mysteries 


193 


1467. See the difficulties of the road and do not lag 
behind; do not waver, oh enduring soul. 

1468. Hold the mirror of effort up before thee; look 
in it and protect thy face. 

1469. Repent, and God will forgive; do not enter 
submissive only to the divine power. 

The story of the ascetic who broke his vote 

1470. A religious man was atti’acted to evil; he chose 
the street of the wine sellers. 

1471. He put wine to his lips and wept bitterly, 
saying : “ Oh wretch that I am, what is my remedy? 

1472. “ The bird of desire has rested in my heart , 
it made the beads of my rosary into a snare. 

1473. “ Mecca was the thief of my time; my original 
home was the wine tavern. 

1474. “ My star was evil, and I suffered misfortune ; 
I was destined for the street of the wine-drinkers. 

1475. “ The eyes of modesty are hidden through my 
fault. Wine is drunk in the streets of the wine-sellers 
through my fault. 

1476. “ May the world be delivered from me, the 
forsaken one; may my dust be far from my skirt. 

1477. “If it were not fate, wdiy should I be an 
idolater? How could a pious man frequent taverns? ” 

1478. Since he was looked on favourably by the 
spiritually minded, a youth who was in that circle, said : 

1479. “ Keep fate out of this affair; to Providence a 
hundred thousand like thee are not worth a barley-corn. 

1480. “ Come to the door of repentance and wash 
away thy sin; then speak in this way.” 








194 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


(121) 1481. When thou goest, they receive thee, forgiving 
thy sins; otherwise they will come themselves and take 
thee captive. 

1482. It is enough, give up grazing on the grass of 
the earth; heaven should be thy green sugar-cane. 

1483. That sleep may not overcome thee, avoid it. 
Make a little provision for the time of non-existence. 

_. 1484. It is unfitting that the eyes should weep blood 

for the same sleep in life and death. 

1485. When religion saw thee in this deep sleep, she 
hid her face behind the veil. 

1486. Arise Nezami, because the king has mounted. 
Why art thou fettered here at midnight? 

TENTH DISCOURSE 
On the appearance of the last day 

1487. Oh heaven, how much longer wilt thou revolve 
so slowly? Oh earth, how much longer wilt thou endure 
this tyranny contentedly? 

1488. After each night comes the dawn; the end of 
every burden is to be unloaded. 

1489. Fear is cast into the spheres of the earth. 

The hour of the earthquake is a supreme thing.” 

1490. The madness of the raging earth broke the link 
of the chain of heaven. 

1491. The wind broke up the distracted earth; the 
mad earth will break the chain. 

1492. With whom did the earth make a wager to 
loosen the girdle of heaven? 

(122) 1493. The night lost its colour and the dawn its 
perfume Heaven ceased to be a polo-stick, and earth 
escaped from being a ball. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


195 


1494. The earth knocks at the door of the high heaven, 
and the girded heaven lies in ambush. 

1495. The cataclysm of heaven emerged from the 
ambush and disintegrated the earth limb by limb. 

1496. The old heaven will rend its robe and will break 
—the string of the clay bead. 

1497. Heaven will come down and will unbend; the 
earth will go swinging up. 

1498. Both heaven and earth will be freed from our 
troubles; our dust will be cleansed from both roads. 

1499. The heavens will cease to work for thee; the 
earth will be immune from thy guile. 

1500. The stars and the sky were ashamed. How 
much longer should they worship a handful of dust? 

1501. The round heaven is like a serpent; in the end 
the serpent will eat dust. 

1502. Oh ye, who have grieved the earth, which of you 
is outside this earth? 

1503. Why is the dust in this vessel of grief? Why 
is the colour of its vessel the blue of mourning? 

1504. If ye cannot lie in ambush and throw out this 
— clay from this vessel, 

1505. Wash your skirt clean seven times with the 
water and dust of this smoking vessel. 

1506. The robe of the stars was lifted from the 
heavens; the line of destruction was drawn on the world. 

(123) 1507. A sudden disaster will fall upon the earth from 

the swiftly revolving heaven. 

1508. The signs which portend upheaval, are shown 
by the agitation of the heavens. 





196 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1509. The head jerks when it is broken; this jerk is 
in this world to-day. 

1510. This black oyster is thine enemy; its eyes are 
foil of pearls, hut its heart full of whales. 

1511. This is not the pearl of the sea, and this is not 
the jewel of the mine of vision. 

1512. He who saw it was saddened and lost his sight 
like a dragon looking at an emerald; 

1513. Therefore he has no eyesight; he has a thou¬ 
sand eyes but no sight. 

1514. Thou hast not chosen the road of non-existence, 
because thou hast seen it with the eyes of others. 

1515. Use thine own feet; one cannot walk with the 
feet of others. 

1516. Even though Bahram is lifted up as high as 
heaven by gold and power, his portion is the grave. 

(124) 1517. One cannot close the door of this road; one 

cannot raise the head above this roof. 

1518. Remain in this prison which has its doors and 
shutters closed, as if thou wert stricken with typhus. 

1519. How long wilt thou discuss and remember 
heaven? May the humble dust be upon its proud head. 

1520. Do not be grieved by the sky and its milky 
way; do not consider the straw carrier worth a barley¬ 
corn. 

1521. Soar above this revolving dome, that thou 
mayest be free from the circle of the narrow compass. 

1522. Imagination which is the thinnest thread, has 
turned back ashamed from this narrow road. 

1523. See the helplessness of shame-faced imagina¬ 
tion; look carefully at this narrow road. 



THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


197 


1524. On this tight-rope do not cling to a hair; other¬ 
wise come thou out like a hair from the dough. 

1525. Since thou mayest obtain better profit than 

this, it would be unwise to stay here. r 

(125) 1526. Since this heap of dust is unfaithful, it is not 

wise to turn to it. 

1527. Every crown is a sign of humiliation; every belt 
is stained with a hundred slaveries. 

n 1528. Every merit bears the ridicule of a city. In 
every sweetmeat is the sting of poison. 

1529. The fire of dawn in this kitchen is half a spark 
from the flames of hell. 

1530. The moon whose body is the candle of heaven, 
gets its oil from begging at the door of the sum 

1531. The cloud which gives life to that which is 
withered, is itself the humour of depression. 

1532. The ship knows what great loss w T ater, which 
is the ease of life, can bring. 

1533. This world is a house full of faults; thou dost 
not look at its defects. 

1534. Thou art blind to thine own faults and hast 
become a mirror for the faults of others. 

1535. Do not show faults like a mirror, that thou 
mayest not be dimmed by a breath. 

1536. Either cast out merit by thine absence ; or break 
the mirror of thine own fault. 

1537. Close thine eyes to the faults of others; look 
at thine own picture and find the faults there. 

1538. There is virtue and vice in everything; do 
not look for faults, and thou wilt find merit. 





198 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1539. Can one not see at night by lamp light? Can 
one see the crow only in the light of the day? 

(126) 1540. How can it be fitting to find fault with the 

feet of the peacock, when it has golden feathers? 

1541. The crow whose body is all black, has white 
eyes; look and thou wilt see. 

The story of Jesus 

1542. The feet of Christ, walking on the earth, 
passed across a small market place. 

1543. He saw a wolf dog which had fallen by the 
cross roads; its life had gone out of its body. 

1544. A crowd like carrion-eating vultures was 
gazing at that carcass. 

1545. One said : “ The fear of this brings darkness 
to the mind, as breath blows out the lamp.” 

1546. Another said : “ That is not all; it blinds the 
eyes and oppresses the heart.” 

1547. Everyone sang on this note and made cruel 
allusions to the carcass. 

1548. When the turn of Jesus came to speak, he dis¬ 
carded faults and found virtue. 

1549. He said : “ The picture remaining of its body 
shows that pearls are not so white as its teeth.” 

1550. And the others, through fear and hope, 
whitened their teeth with that burnt oyster shell. 

1551. Do not seek the faults of others and thine own 
merit; turn thine eyes down to thyself. 

1552. On the day when thou takest the mirror into 
thine own hand, be modest; do not worship thyself. 





T HE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


199 


1553. Do not adorn thyself like the spring, that time 
may not destroy thee. 

1554. The garment of thy faults is woven very thin, 
therefore they have put thee behind nine curtains. 

(127) 1555. What is in this ring which, if thou wilt look) 

at it closely, is not a badge of servitude? 

1556. If thou art not a, dog, do not wear even the 
collar of the Pleiades. If thou art not an ass, do not 
carry even the load of the Messiah. 

1557. What is heaven but an old widow? What is 
earth but a rotten fruit? 

1558. The whole world from its beginning to its end, 
is not worth a grain of barley, because it is transient. 

1559. Do not grieve for the world, oh master; arise, 
if thou grievest, pour out the wine of happiness for 
Nezami. 


ELEVENTH DISCOUBSE 
On the Untrustworthiness of this World 

1560. Arise and roll up the carpet of the heaven, 
because there is no fidelity on this chequered back¬ 
gammon board. 

1561. Do not seek the picture of thy heart’s desire 
in its union. Do not expect fair play, when it doubles 
its throw. 

1562. Why put one’s foot in this sea? Why lay one’s 
load on these waves? 

1563. The falcon said to the duck : “ The country 
is beautiful.” It answered, saying : “ Thank you, I am 
quite comfortable here.” 

1564. Oh thou, who art in this ship of sorrow, thy 
merchandise is the cause of thy destruction. 




200 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1565. Throw thy burden overboard, because it 
cumbers thee ; it will not give thee bread, unless it drowns 
thee. 

1566. There is no treasure of safety in this dustbin; 
there is no marrow of fidelity in this bone. 

(128) 1567. This world gives thee no grain of favour; dis¬ 
solve thy partnership with it. 

1568. The provision in this tent is but a dirty bowl 
and an empty table. 

1569. Whoso looked at it, his mouth was sealed. 
Whoso spoke to it, his tongue was burnt. 

1570. There is naught in this litter but the sound 
of many bells. There is naught in this bowl, but there 
are many flies. 

1571. He who dipped his finger into this bowl, made 
of his skull the ring on his finger. 

1572. It is not right that in this village there should 
be perpetually distracted thought and troubled sleep. 

1573. Retreat into the house of non-existence; leave 
this ruined village. 

1574. Set the window of this house on fire. What 
gain is there in selling thy house to this old woman? 

1575. Why hast thou embraced this world? Thou 
hast not brought it forth from thy womb. 

1576. Draw thy pen across this world and live in 
happiness. Remove thyself and live peacefully far from 
it. 

1577. Thy road is long and thy halting place far 
away; prepare baggage and provision for thy journey, 

(129) 1578. Especially in this desert, full of demons, a 
hell which kills the heated and devours the thirsty. 





THE TREASUEY -OF MYSTERIES 


201 


1579. The blood of the heart is the spring of its water 
of life; the sun is its salt. 

1580. Its salt is the wine of the saltless; the evil 
' eyes yearn for it. 

1581. There is no water, and through this salt which 
looks like water, the courage of the heart is destroyed, 
and the heart of courage bleeds. 

. 1582. What will be the portion of the caravan of the 

senses on a road, at whose sight the heart bleeds? 

1583. In the heart of this desert, haunted by demons, 
the house of the heart is small, and the grief of the 
heart is great. 

1584. He who was content in this wilderness of the 
world’s desires, was saddened like the heart and burst 
like the gall bladder. 

1585. What use is there in this clay from hell? Arise 
and exchange hell for paradise. 

1586. To reduce this earthly form to dust, fate will 
tread thee down continually. 

1587. In the end, as is its wont, it will pass thee from 
hand to hand, until thou art lost. 

1588. Since we must return to the dust, why pass 
over this earth? 

1589. Do not trample anyone under thy foot, because 
fate has trampled many such as thee under its feet. 

(1301 1590. None has lived in this world for ever; none 

has possessed this decree of eternal life. 

1591. Do not tread on this thorn; arise, protect thy¬ 
self from this thorn. 

1592. That impermanent abode of thine is a place of 
fear; why remain in a place of fear ? 





202 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1593. This world is transitory, do not deem it eternal; 
it is an autumn wind, do not think it the breeze of spring. 


The story of the spiritually minded magian priest 

1594. A Magian from the empire of India walked to 
a flower garden. 

1595. He saw a resort like a beautiful picture; he 
found a kingdom decorated with unreality. 

1596. The rose bud, like heaven, ha d girt its loins 
for bloodshed; the short-lived tulip was unaware of itself. 

1597. In the meadow grew flowers of many colours. 
Much wine had been mixed with sugar. 

1598. The rose, like a shield, was wounded by its 
own arrow; the willow tree trembled for fear of its 
own life. 

1599. The tresses of the violet were the chain on its 
own neck; the eyes of the narcissus were the silver coins 
in its lap. 

1600. The tulip had ground gems and the rose tur¬ 
quoises, the tulip which lasts for one breath and the rose 
for one day. 

1601. Their respite was not for more than an instant; 
yet none thought of the future. 

1602. The sage passed through that beautiful garden, 
and after some months he again passed that way.- 

1603. Instead of those roses and nightingales which 
he had seen in the garden, he heard only the cries of 
kites and crows. 

(131) 1604. Hell had displaced paradise; the Csesar of 

that palace had removed to a hovel. 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


203 


1605. The verdure had rotted; the bouquets of roses 
had become heaps of thorns. 

1606. The sage contemplated that scene intently; 
he laughed at all and wept for himself. 

1607. He said : “ Though it has a time of outward 
appearance, nothing is meant to be permanent. 

1608. “ The end of all things, produced by dust and 
water, is destruction. 

1609. “ There is no better street than the street of 
destruction; there is no other way for me than the way 
of destruction.” 

1610. When the vision of grace increased his sight, 
he knew himself and knew God. 

1611. He became the jeweller of the gem of that 
secret, until at his death he returned to essence. 

1612. Oh thou, w r ho art a Mosalman and not yet as 
good as a Magian, thou art a spring and hast not a drop 
of water. 

1613. Be not less than that Magian of India; abandon 
the world and say to it : ‘‘Be not.” 

1614. How long wilt thou hold up thy head im¬ 
pertinently like the rose and pride thyself on thy crown 
and thy belt? 

1615. Rise and unloose the belt of clay, because the 
world has girt its loins for thy blood. 

1616. The crown and the belt are the calamities of 
love, pledge them both to the tavern of love. 

1617. Sometimes thy crown makes thee the master 
of the earth ; sometimes thy belt gives thee the servitude 
of the heart. 

1618. Strive to free thyself from this duality of master 
and servant; or, like Nezami, free thyself from thyself. 




204 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


TWELFTH DISCOURSE 
On the farewell to the earthly abode 

<132) 1619. Rise and say farewell to the world; release 

thy skirt from this snare. 

1620. Prepare a better kingdom than this; open a 
better shop than this. 

1621. When thy heart and eye finish their journey, 
they should groan and shed tears, 

1622. So that, by moistening this clay, thou mayest 
boast of mastery over thine own heart. 

1623. If thou art a camel, dance on the journey; 

_^otherwise do not throw wine-skins under the feet of 

elephants. 

1624. Since thou hast none whom thou canst trust, 
only non-existence can be thy confidant. 

1625. The boon companions and friends have gone 
on; with whom art thou sitting, since thy friends have 
gone ? 

1626. Although thy poetic talent may attract thee 
with subtle imagery, how can it alone be a companion 
to thee? 

1627. It is better that a pious heart should seek the 
light of purity in this black dust. 

1628. Before the stage of disruption is reached on 
the road, discard thy possessions. 

1629. Cast away thy baggage, because thou movest 
slowly, so that, having a light burden, thou mayest 
quickly reach thy destination. 

(133) 1630. Come to heaven, if thou seekest the Heart. 

What couldst thou gain in this house? 



THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


205 


1631. Since thou art entangled in this snare, tear it, 
that thou mayest escape onto the road, 

1632. Because this circle which is like a Mim, will 
—not let thee out, unless it is broken in half. 

1633. Do not be the butt of this chequered dome ; do 
not obey the orders of this circle. 

1634. If thou art free from the orders of day and 
night, thou wilt be outside the circle of this world. 

1635. Until thou canst make thy footsteps firm, do 
not step forward in search of any work. 

1636. Prepare a way of escape from any work, before 
thou enterest on it. 

1637. It is wise to look at the road, so that one may 
avoid falling into a pit. 

4638. Make a,n opening in this house of deluge, that 
thou mayest have opportunity to escape. 

1639. A cunning fox scented a dog; he made two 
exits to his earth, 

1640. But was unaware that the smoke of this de¬ 
ceitful heaven would close the exits. 

1641. What is this happiness which pleases thee? 
Thou art unaware that thou art ignorant of thyself. 

(184) 1642. It was destined that thou shouldst arrive in 

and depart from this world in sorrow. 

1643. If now thou breakest the divine covenant, how 
can thy soul be relieved of its burden of responsibility? 

1644. Walk in the way that the soul has shown thee ; 
throw away both worlds, because thou hast seen the 
world. 



206 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1645. Do not look down, that thou mayest not fear 
the depth; do not look back, that thou mayest not fear 
the shadow. 

1646. Take a provision of religion, because there are 
few habitations on the road ; bring the water of thy tears, 
because the road is waterless. 

1647. Give the pure pearl into the custody of the 
oyster shell. Free thyself and set thy dust free. 

1648. The revolving heaven has killed many a friend 
such as thee; it has slain many more powerful than thee. 

1649. Make a supreme effort in this duel, so that 
some time thou mayest throw it to the ground. 

1650. There is no need to fear the shield and sword 
of him who is not skilled in this art. 

1651. Do not call it a snake, because this twisted rope 
is naught against the attraction of thy love. 

1652. How can one grieve for this glass which can 
be broken by the wind? 

(135) 1653. The generous ones who have extinguished the 

fire of gold, have conquered their enemies by a sweetmeat. 

1654. So long as thou canst, through thine en¬ 
lightened heart, like the sun, kill thine enemy with a rose. 

The story of the two contending philosophers 

1655. Two philosophers, belonging to the same school, 
contended unbecomingly. 

1656. They boasted proudly and lacked humility. 
The empire was the empire of unity; in it was no place 
for duality. 

1657. There cannot be truth on both sides; one is 
acceptable. There cannot be two chiefs; one will be 
destroyed. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


207 


1658. Who ever saw two swords in one scabbard? 
Who ever saw the banquet of tw r o Jamshids in one place? 

1659. It was the desire of the learned men that the 
school should belong to one only. 

1660. When jealousy girt its loins for revenge, the 
school rejoiced at the loss. 

(136) 1661. Both played a melody by night. To clear the 

school, they cried, saying, 

1662. That each should lay aside enmity and drink 
the draught the other had prepared, 

1663. To see which of the two had more courage in 
this affair, and whose poison was the deadlier, 

1664. So that they should give the empire of two 
philosophies to one art and the life of two forms to one 
body. 

1665. The first contestant made poison, so virulent, 
that it could melt black stone. 

1666. He gave it to the other, saying: “This is a 
life-giving wine; do not deem it to be poison, because it 
is better than sugar.” 

1667. The brave man took his draught; he drank the 
poison as if it were sweet sherbet. 

1668. He made an antidote from herbs and drank it. 
He closed the path of the poison by an antidote. 

1669. He burnt like a moth and recovered his wings. 
Like a candle, he hastened back to the assembly. 

1670. He cut a rose from the rose garden; he made 
incantations and breathed them onto the rose. 

1671. To overcome his enemy, he gave him that rose 
which was more effective than the poison. 




‘208 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1672. The enemy was overcome by fear, and he died 
from the rose which that magician gave him. 

1673. The one neutralised the poison in his body by 
remedies. The other died from one rose because of base¬ 
less fears. 

1674. Every coloured rose in the garden of the earth 
is a drop of blood from the heart of mankind. 

1675. Know the garden of the world, whose spring 
time thou art, to be a house of grief, in which thou art 
a picture. 

1676. Throw stones at these layers of earth; throw 
dust on this mirage. 

1677. Pass on from this water and its thoughts; soar 
above this dust and its ruins. 

(137) 1678. Do not study the secrets of the sun and the 

moon; destroy the sun and the moon like an eclipse, 

1679. Because this golden moon which is in this 
‘■"^pavilion, is the demon on the road of Abrah am ’s love. 

1680. The day made thy morn to burn thy heart; 
heaven changed that day of thine to this day. 

1681. If thou hast a heart shining like the sun, one 
day thou wilt reach that day from this. 

1682. Shed tears, that by the rose-water of hope 
thou mayest wash this chequered tablet clean, 

1683. So that thine actions may ensure peace and 
the weight in thy scale be heavy on the day of resur¬ 
rection. 

1684. Religion which strengthens thine arm, will 
straighten the balance of thy scale. 

1685. No noble man of virtue, caring for religion, 
ever grieved for this world. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


209 


1686. Since thy desire is for this world, leave religion 
to Nezami, and take thou this world. 

THIRTEENTH DISCOURSE 
On the contempt of this world 

1687. Look at the age of the world and its miserli¬ 
ness, that thou mayest not be deceived by its youthful 
appearance. 

1688. In the hand of this aged one who looks young, 
thou seest a bunch of roses, and it is fire. 

1689. The spring is a mirage, do not be deceived by 
it. This Qebleh is a cross, do not worship it. 

1690. Thy portion is not even a thorn from all these 
roses. If they all exist, thou art not. 

(138) 1691. When thou art cut off from all thy desires, 

thou wilt take away from this house only what thou 
didst bring into it. 

1692. When they carry their baggage on the sea of 
the day of resurrection, the poor will reach safety. 

1693. No matter whether thou wilt save thy capital 
or lose it, they will take away that which they have 
given thee. 

1694. T his world is a, market place, because it gives 
one thing and instantly takes away another. 

1695. Although one is a silkworm, the other is a 
moth. 

1696. Make a candle of thy gold, that like a lamp 
thou mayest gain by thine own wick. 

1697. Destroy thy body and sa,y to the nine orifices : 
“ Be not.” Cast away thy gold and say to pure gold : 
“ Be not.” 







210 


MAKHZANOL ASBAB 


1698. Put the foot of thy generosity on gold, not thy 
hand, that they may not call thee a worshipper of gold 
like a rose. 

1699. That gold which is not minted to one's own 
desire, is only arsenic. 

1700. If thou lovest gold for its colour, the tail of 
the peacock also has that colour. 

(139) 1701. The kings who take away gold by means of 

steel, are more blacksmiths than kings. 

1702. Though the will of Aaron made of it a crown, 
it sank into a well because of that mistake. 

1703. It is thy load so long as it is on thy head; it 
becomes thy steed, when thou treadest it under thy feet. 

1704. If to give gold is to give life, not to take it 
is better than that gift. 

1705. To take it gives thee greed of the world; to 
spend it gives thee ease of life. 

1706. Is it not better not to take it, than to take it 
and spend it? 

1707. When thou storest gold, it is like rich food 
which gives thee bile; if thou spendest it, it is like a 
fruit which takes away bile. 

— 1708 • Gold which is mined in the East, is called 

western by the ignorant. 

1709. The West and its people are the enemies of 
generosity; the East and its people are enlightened by 
generosity. 

1710. Whatever the eastern morning gives, the 
western night borrows. 

1711. Gold is the ruler of the life of all mines; the 
feather is the power of the wings of all birds. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


211 


1712. Though that Roman gold which, in the balance 
of love, is true by the stone of Damascus 

(140) 1713. And is shining and beautiful, throw dust on 

it, because it is deceitful. 

1714. Whose hat has this thief not carried? And 
who has not been misled by the wiles of this demon? 

The story of the Hdji and the Sufi 

1715. A pilgrim started on his pilgrimage; he prac¬ 
tised the customs of the pilgrims. 

1716. All that he had above his requirements, 
amounted to one purse of dinars. 

1717. He said : “ My heart tells me that a certain 
noble Sufi who has renounced the world, 

1718. “Is a religious man; if others are untrust¬ 
worthy, he is to be trusted.” 

1719. He went out and brought him in secretly to 
his own house and entrusted him with his purse of dinars. 

1720. He said : “ Guard this secretly; then bring it 
back to me when I return.” 

1721. The Haji started on his way to the desert; the 
old man took away the gold which was entrusted to him. 

1722. Oh Lord, I take refuge in thee! How long was 
it that the heart of the poor man yearned for that gold? 

1723. He said : “ I will straighten out my affairs with 
the gold; I have found the treasure which I required. 

1724. “ I will use it up quickly, that I may not be 
tied to that which God gives so secretly.” 

1725. He untied the knot of that string and enjoyed 
happiness for some nights. 








212 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1726. He spent on bis belly all that gold with which 
he was entrusted, and he -worshipped his belly. 

1727. He laid his hand on that casket of dinars; he 
made the tresses of the beauties rings on his girdle. 

1728. He tore the pious robe of the Sufi; all that 
was left to him was grief and many excuses. 

1729. He ate the prey, till not even a sign of it was 
left, and not even tallow remained for his lamp. 

(141) 1730. When our pilgrim returned from his journey, 

he paid an unexpected visit to the dishonest man. 

1731. He said : “ Oh sage, bring it to me.” He 
answered: “What?” He said: “The gold.” The 
Sufi replied : “Be silent, 

1732. “ Be generous, and do not dispute. Who can 
take revenue from a, ruined village? 

1733. “The purse was spent on lust and desire; 
there is a great distance between a poor man and a purse. 

1734. “ No one has carried off booty from a Turk; 
no man has ever entrusted his belongings to a rogue. 

1735. “ Your gold broke the pillar of my heart, and 
I was broken by the dust which settled upon me.” 

1736. With a hundred smiles he spent the money; 
with a hundred tears he stood before him. 

1737. He said: “ Be generous, because we repent; 
we were infidels and have become Mosalmans. 

1738. “ Nature is pregnant with vice ; if there is vice, 
the fault is mine.” 

1739. Until the generosity of God said to him sternly : 

Arise, because the dervish is standing, arise.” 





THE TREASURY OF MY STERIES 


213 


1740. When the owner of the silver turned to God, 
he was generous and let the matter drop. 

1741. He said to himself : “ Do not be hard on him; 
he has nothing. What can I take from nothing? 

1742. “ What can I take from him who has not a 
grain of barley and has no pledge other than pleas for 
forgiveness ? 

(142) 1743. “ That which remains to the Sufi of that pro- 

_perty, is a round Mim and a Kufic Alef.” 

1744. He said : “If thou dost not wish me to ill- 
treat thee, and that I should make lawful to thee that 
wdiich is unlawful, 

1745. “Oh thou, who art as deceitful as the heaven, 
do not have a short sleeve and a, long hand.” 

1746. There is no heart which is free from greed and 
envy; none is to be trusted on this earth. 

1747. Religion is good money, do not entrust it to the 
devil; do not give the royal armlet to the keeper of dogs. 

1748. If thou shouldst give it, oh master, the loss is 
thine; none can take back capital from the poor. 

1749. This is a stage of error, take virtue as thy 
provision. Lay hold on the skirts of religion and retire. 

1750. Heaven does not rob the poor; it robs the cara¬ 
vans of the rich. 

1751. Since the guardian of this road is a robber, 
poverty is better than wealth. 

1752. By experience, I found that the bee stings him 
who desires the honey. 

1753. The flesh of the lion is bitter, so that after its 
death it may not be eaten by wild animals. 




214 


MAKHZANOL ASEAE 


1754. The candle burns out through standing upright. 
The moon wanes through seeking perfection. 

1755. The wind which is both at war and at peace 
with the dust, is safe on this road through its poverty. 

(143) 1756. Does the seagull know that the calamity of 

the fish is its silver? 

1757. When gold is the scale of thy need, it becomes 
the opening chapter of thy five prayers. 

1758. Thou wilt not be free from the road of this 
need, until like Nezami thy life is pure. 


FOURTEENTH DISCOURSE 
On the reproach of negligence 

1759. Oh thou, who art entirely happy, eating fodder 
like a donkey and a cow, 

1760. Inattentive to this centre round which the sun 
revolves, negligent of this circle of lapis lazuli, 

1761. The matter is for the enlightened ones. What 
grief have the enlightened for the world? 

1762. Come to thy work. Why art thou sleeping? 
Do the work which has been allotted to thee. 

1763. Why art thou in a drunken sleep? They are 
in ambush ; the experienced do not act thus. 

1764. See this mound of grief, look forward, observe 
carefully, and see thine own incapacity. 

1765. Thy reason is forgetful like an old man; that 
he may remember thee, remind him. 

1766. If thou hadst not the honour of reason, who 
would call upon thy name? Who would worship thee? 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


215 


1767. Reason is Messiah, do not rebel against it. If 
thou art not an ass, do not lead the ass into the mire. 

1768. Either get thy light from the path of reason, 
or keep thy skirt far from its door. 

(144) 1769. Do not intoxicate the reason which educates. 

Do not make the eagle a bait for the sparrow. 

1770. The hostility of thy reason made the wine which 
—■ is lawful everywhere, unlawful. 

1771. What is wine that thy honour should be in its 
bowl? Reason is that spring which they call wine. 

1772. Although wine takes away the grief of the 
world, oh master, do not take that which takes away 
reason. 

1773. Wine is salt mixed with the heart, poured upon 
-—the heart of the saltless ones. 

1774. If thou didst desire advice, do not take that 
which makes thee unmindful of all things. 

1775. How ignorant is the man who tastes that which 
draws the line of oblivion across him. 

1776. Blind the eye of vain thoughts; fetter the foot 
of drunkenness. 

1777. Oh thou, who, like an Alef, art in love with 
thine own stature, thou lovest the gloom of thine own 
melancholy. 

1778. If thou art an Alef, be a bird without wings; 
-— otherwise be like ba, a letter with a drooping head. 

1779. When thou art, like an Alef, the ornament of 
the assembly, thou hast nothing and art poor like an Alef. 

1780. Thou art not a thorn, that thou desirest height; 
it is better for thee to be humble like the rose. 


216 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


1781. Thou art not a child, do not play games. Thou 
art not life, do not aspire to length. 

(145) 1782. The day has come to an end, and the sun has 

set. The darkness grows, as the light decreases. 

1783. I have heard that, when the day draws towards 
evening, the shadows become twice as long. 

1784. Why dost thou, like a garden, worship shade? 
He the destroyer of darkness, like the light of a lamp. 

1785. If thou canst remove thy shadow, thy faults 
will become invisible like thy shadow. 

1786. Not everyone can sit in darkness; only the 
spring of the water of life is in darkness. 

1787. Oh thou, whose head and feet are upside down 
thy judgment is in confusion. 

1788. Dawn gives thee the golden bowl, that thou 
mayest cleanse thyself from thyself. 

1789. When thou washest thy garments in this basin, 
draw thy water from the source of the sun. 

— , ^ le tbsc sim > which is thy soap, cleanses 

thy blood-stained garments. 

1791. Nature has kindled such a fire in thee, that 
no water remained in the heart of thy life. 

— If thy body is not cleansed from the stain of 
selfishness, yet gold which is not all red is still gold. 

X1 17 , 93 1 ; If we sa y all creation is pure, how then should 
the belly of hell be filled? 

■ 1794 - A man gets the armour of truthfulness from 
fire alone. 

(146) 1795. Falsehood will lead thee to need and poverty; 

thou wilt free thyself from all sorrows, if thou art truthful.' 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


217 


1796. If, like the scales, thou art true, entrust the 
truth of thy heart to the balance. 

1797. Every barley-corn and every grain which thy 
hand takes out of thy measure and thy scales, 

1798. Is each one in its own place, and on the day 
of retribution they will be brought forward. 

1799. They will disclose thy secret; they will show 
thy short measure and thine overcharges. 

1800. Do not thyself hold the balance ; if thou boldest 
it, give more and take less. 

1801. The rose embraced the thorn from its crooked¬ 
ness ; the sugar cane got its sweetness from its upright¬ 
ness. 

1802. Where truth raises its banner, the help of God 
clasps it by the hand. 


The story of the tyrannical king and the truthful man 

1803. There was a king who .tyrannised over his 
subjects, and he had the art of Hajjaj in his inquisitions. 

1804. Whatever the night brought forth from the 
day, was known to him in the morning. 

1805. One morning, someone went to the king, dis¬ 
closing more secrets than the sun and the moon. 

1806. He had stored up games of the night from the 
moon, and had learned airs and graces from the dawn. 

1807. He said : “A certain old man secretly called 
tliee a murderer, a tyrant, and a shedder of blood. 

1808. The king was enraged at these words and said : 
r< I will kill him instantly.” 




218 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1809. He spread the sheet of leather and strewed sand 
upon it. Demons would fly before his insanity. 

(147) 1810. A youth went, swiftly as "the wind, to the old 
man and said : “ The king has accused thee of a crime.” 

1811. The old man made his ablutions, put on a 
shroud, went to the king, and began to speak. 

1812. The cunning king wrung his hands and turned 
away his face in malice. 

1813. He said : “ I hear that thou hast spoken, calling 
me revengeful and a murderer. 

1814. ‘‘ Thou art aware of my wise rule. Why dost 
thou call me a tyrannical demon? ” 

1815. The old man replied : “I am not asleep; I 
have called thee worse things than this. 

1816. “ Youth and age are endangered by thy actions ; 
towns and villages are afflicted by thy intrigues. 

1817. “ I who have thus recounted thy faults, bear 
the mirror reflecting thy virtues and vices. 

1818. ” Since the mirror shows thy picture correctly, 
break thyself; it is an error to break the mirror. 

1819. “ See that I speak truly and heed me; if it be 
not so, kill me on the scaffold.” 

1820. When the sage admitted the truth, his veracity 
affected the heart of the king. 

1821. When the king recognised his superiority in 
truth, he realised the sage’s rectitude and his own false¬ 
hood. 

1822. He said : “ Take away the funeral herbs and 
the shroud; dress him in our robe of honour and perfume 
him with ambergris.” 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


219 


1823. He turned away from tyranny, practised justice 
and the care of his subjects. 

1824. None ever hid his own veracity, and no one 
suffered loss on account of truth. 

1825. Be truthful, that thou ruayest gain salvation; 
if thou art truthful, God will give thee victory. 

1826. If true words are all pearls, they are indeed 
bitter, because “ Truth is bitter.” 

1827. When thy words are true, God is thy helper. 

1828. The nature and the heart of Nezami are both 
true, and because of this truth, his affairs are in order. 

FIFTEENTH DISCOURSE 
On the reproach of the envious 

1829. Each moment, the clever actor behind this 
curtain shows a strange scene on the curtain. 

(148) 1830. The minstrels are seated on the carpet, but 

there is none to dance. The sea is full of pearls, but there 
is no diver. 

1831. Silver, wealth, a crown, or a sword, are not 
grudged to thee, if thou dost not grudge them to thyself. 

1832. Even though thou wert equal to the angel 
Gabriel, fate is not niggardly; neither is divine power 
miserly. 

1833. However much thou takest, there is still more 
to take. His profits are greater than thine expenditure. 

1834. Travel on this road and note thy progress. 
Knock on this door and understand the mysteries. 

1835. Its stones are rubies, and its herbs are the 
philosopher’s stone. If thou dost not realise this, the 
fault is thine. 




220 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1836. Here the controlling hand and the pen are 
"Broken, because such great treasure is behind this curtain. 

1837. Each moment a fruit comes from this garden; 
each is more beautiful than the preceding one. 

1838. In this treasury are many heart strings; each 
necklace is more beautiful than the other. 

1839. Each group of the travellers who walk one 
behind the other, is wiser than the preceding one. 

1840. (Reason honours only reality; reason sets no 
store on age and youth. 

1841. It is said that, when a stone grows old, it be¬ 
comes a ruby. Opinions differ on this point. 

1842. These people grow worse with age. In them 
there is nothing but noise, like an echo in the mountains. 

— 1843. Thy milk is an unwholesome poison to him who 

has seen thee suckling in infancy. 

(149) 1844. Justice is wanting in old age; the old do not 

wish well to the young. 

1845. A fresh rose gives great happiness. It is the 
old thorn which wounds. 

1846. Collyrium is made from unripe grape. A ser¬ 
pent becomes a dragon in old age. 

1847. An old brain cannot receive reason which in¬ 
habits the skull. 

1848. He who compiles the tables of the stars, does 
not make his predictions from an old almanack. 

1849. The old dogs who eat like lions, tear out the 
bowels of the gazelles wolfishly. 

1850. If I fear the old wolves, look upon my beauty 
and blame me not. 





THE TEE A SUE Y OF MYSTEEIES 


221 


1851. The old wound lightly, their wound is pleasant. 
What can I do with the nature of youth, which is fire? 

1852. Although youth is all wisdom, does it not also 
possess a strain of madness? 

1853. Some grey-haired men who lay claim to youth, 
claim to be black, when they are white. 

1854. I who scatter treasure like a rose , claim old age 
in youth. 

(150) 1855. The old are possessed by self-love. Enmity 

to self is friendship with God. 

1856. Call that new moon which thou sawest as a 
crescent, a full moon, when it is perfect. 

1857. When the palm tree grows tall, stretch thy hand 
far that it may reach the dates. 

1858. When the grain which is thrown into a corner, 
grows to an ear of corn, call it a grain no longer. 

1859. See that, when a pond becomes a lake from the 
water of the stream, thou dost not look upon it with the 
same eyes. 

1860. The sun looked with a different eye upon the 
night which entirely closed its eyes to the dawn. 

1861. A deadly enemy who is wise, is better than 
a foolish friend. 

1862. Do not look upon the sugar cane merely as 
vegetation; see how sweet it is. 

1863. Give thy heart to merit not to a boastful man ; 
surrender to merit wherever it may be. 

1864. Though the. oyster shell has much water, a 
pearl is produced by one drop of rain. 

1865. Much trouble of heart and soul is needed to 
procure a royal pearl. 





222 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1866. Thy protection should sound its bugle for every 
banner which providence raises anew. 

1867. They have not yet ruined this village; nor have 
they yet rolled up this carpet. 

1868. Do not censure creation; beware, lest thou 
shouldst suffer the scourge like Satan. 

1869. Providence compels him to rebel who did not 
submit to its commands. 

The story of the young prince and his old enemies 

(151) 1870. I heard a story that in far-off Marv there was 

a young prince, like a cypress. 

1871. He was troubled on account of the nobles of his 
country. The country loved him as did fortune. 

1872. The aged were fighting his youth. He was in 
peril from that approaching danger. 

1873. One night he fell asleep full of anxiety on 
account of that rebellion. In that condition he saw T at 
sage in a dream, who said to him : 

1874. “ Oh new moon, destroy the old tower ; oh fresh 
rose, cut off the old branch, 

1875. ‘ ‘ That the empire may be confirmed to thee and 
thy life become more pleasant than thy nature.” 

1876. When the king aw r oke from his deep sleep, he 
destroyed those persons. 

1877. He built up anew and destroyed the old. The 
empire was confirmed anew to that young king. 

1878. The destroyer of the empire should be humbled. 
A treacherous army is better dispersed. 

1879. The new branch will not grow from the trunk 
of the cypress, unless the old branch is cut off. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


223 


1880. Unless the water is diverted from the stream, 
the plane tree will not unfold its leaves. 

1881. Unless the passage to the spring be clear, water 
will not be born from the heart and the eye of the clay. 

1882. With thee, but outside thee, is one who feeds 
thy heart. He gives good counsel to thine ears. 

1883. Draw that sword from its scabbard for an in¬ 
stant. How long wilt thou keep it sheathed, oh thou, 
its enemy? 

1884. That breath comes not from the casket of this 
dust. Thou dost not give that pure companion his due. 

1885. Sacrifice everything to such a being and be 
wholly entitled to the name of generosity. 

(152) 1886. The rich who attained to honour and wealth, 

found the eternal empire through generosity. 

1887. The seed of generosity gives sure harvest. 
When it ripens, it gives a provision for the day of judg¬ 
ment. 


1888. Oh God, give to Nezami pure gold from the 
treasure of thy generosity. 


SIXTEENTH DISCOUESE 
On travelling swiftly 

1889. Oh thou, whose banner is raised by a breeze, 
and who lowerest it to that which is mere dust, 

1890. There is no village, and thou claimest to be a 
villager. There is no empire, and thou claimest the 
throne of Solomon. 

1891. Thou art not a sword. What are all these 
wounds? Thou art not a bell. What are these tinklings? 

l 




224 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1892. Scatter silver like the edge of the sword. Rise, 
be empty like the inside of a drum. 

1893. The devil draws thee to himself; thou hast not 
yet fallen. Do not give up the fight; thou art not dead 
but living. 

1894. Do not surrender to a Magi an; do not claim 
courage, when thy sword is never drawn. 

1895. The eloquent are worthy to read the procla¬ 
mation of empire. The Messiah is the recipient of the 

"sneeze of Adam. 

(153) 1896. He who, like a moth, possesses true love, will 

strike single-handed at the army of fire. 

1897. Dive for a short time and die. Throw down the 
beggar’s robe and receive an empire. 

1898. By the living God, thy generosity which is a 
cloak for plunder, is not godly. 

1899. Be a lion ; do not fear the kitchen cat. Be talc ; 
do not fear the fires of hell. 

1900. If thou art depraved, hell fire is thy lawful 
portion. If thou art gold or a ruby, do not fear fire. 

1901. How much more pride, oh rogue of the dustbin? 
How much more self-glorification, oh thou bag of bones? 

1902. There have been others before us, who did not 
rest from seeking high position. 

1903. See what profit was theirs from that glory. 
There was a profit, but since it was lost, what profit 
was it? 

1904. If thou, a grain of dust, shouldst tread upon 
heaven in power and dignity like the sun and the moon, 

1905. Even if thou shouldst surpass that circle, since 
thou art dust, thou wilt fall. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


225 


1906. So that thy head may not be cut off, as hair is. 
cut, beware, do not set foot on this pinnacle. 

1907. Thou art not a bird, thou canst not fly. Unless 
thou strivest mightily, thou wilt not reach it. 

1908. Attack heaven valorously, so that astonishingly 
it may fall at thy feet. 

1909. Thou hast drunk wine, why blame the poison? 
Thou hast sinned, why blame fate? 

1910. Do not rail at fate, oh good man; fate has done 
no ill to thee and to me. 

154) 1911. Tate made great efforts and performed great 

wonders to improve us. 

1912. Since we are of no account in the world, why 
should we blame fate? 

1913. Unless the ruby is lustrous, the king will not 
put the seal of acceptance upon it. 

1914. Stones are plentiful in the world; those which 
turn to rubies are rare. 

1915. The thorn and the jasmine are both vegetable 
growths. One is the thorn which damages sight; the 
other is collyrium. 

1916. Colour and scent do not leave the true rose, 
even if it has no help from the water of the stream. 

1917. Even if water could increase its benefits, how 
could it turn thorns and thistles into jasmine? 

1918. If the scheme were not thus established, the 
laws of the world would hav.e been otherwise. 

1919. The affair rests in the hands of God and is not 
affected by our designs. He gives empire and riches to 
whom he wills in this world. 






226 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1920. A man falls through lack of grace; those who 
are favoured, need have no fear in this world. 

1921. The fortune of him who seeks the divine 
empire, is ever high. Be the servant of that empire, 
wherever it is to be found. 

1922. This kingdom is bestowed by divine grace and 
not by worldly authority. They do not give an empire 
in jest. 

1923. Hold to those who are spiritually rich, so that 
thou mayest not need to search vainly. 

1924. Do not associate with the base ; be accepted and 
honoured by the world. 

1925. Prosper with the good fortune of Orion. Break 
“" the walnut and test thy fortune. 

(155) 1926. Humble thyself, if thou seekest the empire. 

Tree thyself from the tangled affairs of this world. 

1927. It is the pure water which is welcome. Aloe- 
w r ood is burnt, because it is knotted. 

1928. Follow the Heart; give thy heart to none. 
Thine own body is load enough on thy way. 

1929. How long wilt thou lay thy hand on another 
hough, saying : “Oh, that I had greater riches? ’’ 

1930. Even if thou couldst grasp the whole world, 
since thou must leave it, why seek it? 

1931. Renounce greed, because it is the robber on the 
road of devotion. Contentment will kill thy greed. 

1932. The centre of this turquoise-coloured dome is 
open to thee and closed to imagination. 

1933. Either do not fear, grasp it; or vanquish it with 
one thought. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


227 


1934. There is no knowledge left in the clay of' 
humanity, no spirituality left in the whole world. 

1935. In the two picture books of these nine scribes,, 
there is no figure which has reality. 

1936. Do not seek the friendship of the enemy of 
reality; do not seek the water of life in the mouth of 
a dragon. 

1937. A wise enemy who is the grief of one’s soul, 
is better than a foolish friend. 

The story of the wounded child 

1938. The child of a nobleman went out with some 
others of his own age. 

1939. As he was running, he fell down; his happiness 
was destroyed, and his backbone was broken. 

1940. The distress of his companions was greater than 
the calamity which had befallen him. 

1941. He who was his best friend, said : “ We must 
hide him in the bottom of a well, 

(156) 1942. So that the secret may not be as manifest 

as the sun, and that we should not be ashamed before 
his father.” 

1943. The wisest child among them w T as his enemy. 

1944. He said : “ Surely the matter will not be kept 
a secret by this company. 

1945. “ Since they consider me to be his enemy, 
they will lay the blame for this misfortune upon me.” 

1946. He went to his father and informed him of the 
accident, so that the father put the matter right. 

1947. He who possesses the jewel of wisdom, is able 
to do all things. 






228 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1948. Who can unloose the knot of fortune? He who 
can trample upon it. 

1949. Since Nezami has passed beyond the possessions 
of this world, his work has surpassed high heaven. 


SEVENTEENTH DISCOURSE 
On devotion and solitude 

1950. Oh thou, who neglectest God and thyself, re¬ 
maining in the grief of thy soul and the toil of thy body, 

1951. Be silent; the movements of the boasting spirit 
which is in this world, reach only to the lips. 

1952. Do not embrace the world like the arch of 
heaven; do not bind thyself to what is not thine. 

1953. The power of the world is greater than the 
power of thine arm; its weights are too heavy for thy 
scales. 


1954. Do not expect the strength of a mountain from 
a speck of dust. Do not expect to boil a cauldron on 
one spark. 

1955. - Every loin which is girt with the belt of con¬ 
tentment, is freed for ever from the service of the body. 

1956. The harvest of greed is disappointment; the 
crown of contentment is on the head of submission. 

1957. In this defile, there are many pickpockets; he 
whose purse is emptiest, is most at ease. 

1958. If thou art wealthy, submit to anxiety; other¬ 
wise go, hang on the skirts of poverty. 

(157) 1959. There was a beardless man who grieved at his 

condition. He saw two men fighting and pulling each 
other’s beards. 







r 


T HE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 229 

1960. He said : “ Though my face is hairless like a 
tongue, I am glad to be safe from those who pull beards.” 

. 1961. They have deemed it advisable to take away 
thine ass and thy load, 

1962. So that, like Jesus, thou mayest reach the door 
of the Heart, and arrive at thy destination without an 
ass and without a load. 

1963. If thou art a believer, do not ponder on fire- 
worship. Strive for refinement, do not be uncouth. 

1964. This is a wave of destruction, go with less speed.- 
Throw thy burden into the water, and save thy soul. 

1965. It is better for thee to be pithless and ruined, 
that thou mayest float on the water like a gourd. 

1966. There is value in eating little and sleeping little. 
The treasure of greatness is in destruction. 

1967. Thou art not a lover of carrion like a kite; be 
a crow, do not dip thy feet in blood. 

1968. If thy body is bloodless like a picture, thou wilt 
be saved from being eaten by vultures. 

1969. Know that blood is a heart turned to wine, a 
fire turned to water by shame. 

1970. That thou mayest break the power of blood, 
thou wilt suffer the stab of the lancet, even if thou 
art iron. 

(158) 1971. Do not suddenly give up the habit of eating; 

save by eating less. 

1972. The lion is proud, because it eats little. It is 
the nature of fire to consume much. 

1973. Since the day was satisfied with one loaf, it 
became the light of the eye of the wise. 






230 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


1974. When the night drank its morning draught too 
early, the excess of its blood turned it black. 

1975. Excess of food lessens reason. It makes the 
heart which is like sweet herbs, into the target of grief. 

1976. Thy reason is a soul, and thou art its body. 
Thy soul is a treasure, and thou art its talisman. 

1977. How can this treasure give thee light, until 
thou breakest the talisman of its door? 

1978. Dust is known to be untrustworthy. Say Let 
there be no association with the untrustworthy.” 

1979. The dust will not grieve for thee, were it to 
bring the whole of thy life to an end in grief; do not' 
grieve. 

1980. Someone said to a negro : “ Oh father, why this 
laughter? One should weep at such blackness as thine? ” 

1981. He answered: “As I have no hope in this 
world, it is better to have a black face and to laugh.” 

(159) 1982. It is not strange to find happiness in a black 

face, because a black cloud gives out lightning. 

1983. Since thou hast no desire for this prison, be 
lightning and laugh at the whole world. 

1984. The laughter of the parrot lessens the sweetness 
of sugar. Loud laughter closes the mouth of the part¬ 
ridge. 

1985. It is better to weep than to open the mouth in 
untimely laughter. 

1986. To burn and to laugh like lightning, shortens 
life like a flame. 

1987. What is this laughter without joy like a candle ? 
One should weep much at this laughter.' 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


231 


1988. Bite thy lip in laughter, that thou mayest not 
laugh immoderately. 

1989. To weep much is not good for the eyes; too 
much laughter is not becoming. 

1990. There must be a due proportion of good and 
evil in the old and the young. 

1991. Rise, grieve and be happy. Sometimes one 
and sometimes the other is fitting. 

1992. There is a sorrowful cry in a happy heart. 
Within the jet of the night, there is the jewel of the day. 

1993. No one has indulged in his lusts without after¬ 
wards receiving a blow. 

1994. Every load of baggage has its own bell; every 
sweetmeat has its own fly. 

(160) 1995. Providence is thy wise nurse; leave thy good 

and evil to her care. 

1996. If she gives thee vinegar, do not ferment like 
syrup. She desires thy good. What knowest thou? Be 
silent. 

1997. The serious traveller on this road must make 
constant effort. It needs a Moses to be the travelling 
companion of the Prophet Khezr. 

1998. Thou must serve the great to reach greatness. 

1999. In time of need, the helpful friend is he who 
withdraws the snare, not he who drags one down to 
calamity. 


The story of a sage and his disciples 

2000. A traveller, one of the spiritual guides, was on 
a journey ; with him were a thousand disciples. 



232 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2001. The sage in that desert broke wind loudly and 
gave it as a trust to the trustees of the dust. 

2002. Every one of them left him, until they had all 
departed but one. 

2003. The sage said to bun : “ What happened, that 
they all departed, and thou didst remain? ” 

2004. The disciple said : “ Oh thou, who livest in my 
heart, the crown of my head is the dust of the sole of thy 
feet. 

2005. “ I did not come by a wind at first, that the 
same wind should blow me back.” 

(161) 2006. He who expects a gift, will go when he has 

received it. He who comes by a wind, will go by a wind. 

2007 . Dust travels quickly and settles quickly, there¬ 
fore it cannot establish itself in one place. 

2008. The mountain comes slowly into being, there¬ 
fore it is so firm. 

2009. The way of the world is to divulge secrets. The 
work of patience is to bear burdens. 

2010. Bear the load of piety, if thou art not lustful. 
Do not bear the burden of nature, if thou art not an ass. 

2011. So long as the proclamation of thy piety was 
not untrue, thine eyes wept on account of it, but it was 
not stained. 

2012. Piety in the gold-embroidered robe of the king 
is the story of the basket and Solomon. 

2013. The candle which scatters gold every night, is 
an ascetic hidden under a cloak. 

2014. Piety is a stranger in the wine tavern. Treasure 
is precious in a ruined place. 




THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


233 


2015. The piety of Nezami, which is a beautiful 
garment, shelters under the banner embroidered with 
gold. 

EIGHTEENTH DISCOURSE 
On the contempt of hypocrites 

2016. Some counterfeiters met together and made a 
new counterfeit die. 

(162) 2017. Know their outward appearance to be tin like 

the inside. Guard thy words from them. 

2018. To thy face they are more agreeable than the 
daylight; behind thy back they are more deceitful than 
darkness, 

2019. Smoother than a candle, knottier than aloe- 
wood; smooth in outward appearance, but cunning in 
reality. 

2020. They are unjust and uncharitable; they find 
fault, and they complain. 

2021. They have learnt of love merely from the lips 
of others; they have stored up revenge heap upon heap. 

2022. They are eager, but more withered than a 
heart; they are alive, but as dead as their own hearts. 

2023. Do not test their friendship on the touchstone 
of thy heart. Thou art not drunk, do not put thy foot 
in this mire. 

2024. They echo like the mountain; do not tell them 
thy secrets. If thou desirest secrecy, do not give them 
voice. 

2025. They boast that they may gain thine affection ; 
they strive to gain from thee. 

2026. Since that friendship is due to their need, may 
the curse of God be on such amity. 








234 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2027. Any speech which has a selfish object, is friend¬ 
ship which incites to enmity, 

2028. Friendship which is based on division, is not 
friendship but enmity. 

(163) 2029. What will a friend call thy poison? A sweet¬ 

meat. What will a friend call thy faults? Virtues. 

2030. A friend is a healing salve. If he is not, cease 
to associate with the unworthy. 

2031. It is a, cat which eats its own kittens from love 
of its own kind. 

2032. Who is a friend? He who keeps secrets. All 
these divulge secrets like time. 

2033. They all plan how 7 they can surpass thee, and 
by what schemes they may lessen the value of thy coin. 

2034. Outwardly their reins are tied to thee; in the 
time of necessity they necessarily depart. 

2035. If the appearance of a friendship is denied by 
thy heart, it is enmity. 

2036. How can the body know who is thy friend? 
The heart knows who is faithful. 

2037. Thou hast one heart and a thousand heartaches, 
one withered rose and a thousand wounds from thorns. 

2038. There are a thousand kingdoms but only one 
Fereidun. There is much ambergris, but only few enjoy 
it. 

2039. Everything in this world divulges secrets. Only 
thy heart is the confidant of thy secrets. 

2040. If thy heart does not lock up that secret, how 
canst thou expect it to be kept in the hearts of others? 




THE TREASURY OP MYSTERIES 


235 


2041. If thy heart is not transparent, and this is 
wrong, why is thy secret like a sun in the desert? 

2042. If thy heart does not tell thy secret by its 
transparency, why does a glass show the wine it holds? 

2043. Since friendship is a necessity, do not withhold 
thy secret from thy friend. 

2044. Since thou hast set foot on this empire, strive 
to gain a partner. 

2045. Unless thou knowest the soul of thy friend, do 
not waste the jewel of thine own secrets. 


The story of Jamshid and his household 

(164) 2046. One of the household of Jamshid was the 

keeper of his secrets. Their relation was closer than that 
of the moon and the sun. 

2047. The fortunes of that young man rose to such a 
height, that the king honoured him above all the world. 

2048. Since he surpassed others in faithfulness, the 
king entrusted his treasure to his heart. 

2049. Notwithstanding his great intimacy with the 
king, that youth sought to go far from him, as an arrow 
flies from the bow. 

2050. The secret of the king wore down the soul of 
the young man. He was unable to tell that secret to 
anyone. 

2051. An old woman found her way to that young 
man and saw that his red tulips were like her yellow roses. 

2052. She said : “ Oh cypress, what wind of autumn 
has blown on thee, thou who drinkest w r ater from the 
stream of the king? 





236 


MAKHZANOL ASEAR 


2053. *‘ Why art thou pale? Thou art not treated 
with cruelty. What is the cause of thy grief in this 
fortune ? 

2054. “ Why is the colour of age on thy youthful 
cheek? Why are thy wild tulips like a dandelion? 

2055. “ Since thou keepest the secrets of the king 
of the world, be happy like the heart of the king. 

2056. “ The subjects prosper through their kings, 
especially the leaders of the army.” 

2057. The young man said : “ Thou speakest ig¬ 
norantly of this matter. Thou knowest not what is in 
my heart. 

2058. ‘ ‘ Patience has given me pain as my companion ; 
patience has turned my face so pale. 

2059. 11 The king has placed in my heart, consonantly 
with his majesty, the jewel of his secrets. 

2060. “ That which he has entrusted to my heart, is 
great; I cannot divulge the secrets of the great. 

(165) 2061. “ My heart is not locked on his words, as it 

would be on lesser matters; 

2062. “ Therefore I do not laugh with thee, lest the 
bird of the secret might fly from my tongue. 

2063. ‘‘ I keep this secret in my heart. I give it my 
heart and my heart bleeds, 

2064. 11 And if I divulge the secret of the king, fortune 
will grieve for me.” 

2065. The old woman said : ‘‘Do not mention any 
name. Keep thy secret to be thine only companion. 

2066. “ Do not deem anyone to be the confidant of 
this secret. Do not even consider thine own shadow as 
thy confidant. 





THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


237 


2067. “ It is better to have this golden-yellow face 
than that it should be reddened in blood.” 

2068. Every night I hear the head constantly be¬ 
seeching the tongue to beware. 

2069. If thou desirest life, hold thy tongue. Thou art 
not the sun, do not disclose secrets. 

2070. A man who holds his tongue, is happy. It is tire 
mad dog whose tongue hangs out. 

2071. It is for thine own good to be tongue-tied. It 
is better that a sword should be sheathed. 

2072. This counsel gives ease to life : The tongue is 
the plague of life. 

2073. That they may not scent thee out, as they would 
the violet, and cut thy throat on account of thy tongue, 

2074. Guard thy tongue in this world, that thy head 
may not cry “ Alas! ” in the basin. 

(166) 2075. Do not open thy mouth, though there be much 

pleasure in it, because there are many ears behind the 
wall. 

2076. Do not listen to evil, but be deaf; do not speak 
evil, but be dumb. 

2077. How long wilt thou write? Slow down thy 
pen. They will write against thee ; keep thy mouth shut. 

2078. Wash away what thou hearest as with water. 
Be a mirror, do not say what thou seest. 

2079. The devotees do not relate in the day what 
they see in the night, oh how strange! 

2080. Therefore this starry dome will not tell by day 
what it sees by night. 

2081. If thou hast been instructed behind this veil, 
do not repeat by day what thou hast seen by night. 






238 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2082. In the heart of the night, which is the secret 
repository of treasures, are the treasures of many hearts. 

2083. The swift enlightened travellers pass by that 
which they see. 

2084. He who surpasses high heaven, carries off the 
ball from the arena of the heart. 

2085. The eye and the tongue which love outward 
appearances, are as the hair of the head and the skin of 
the body. 

2086. Love, when secret, is a miracle ; when manifest, 
it leads one to the wine taverns. 

2087. They have made this knot with the cord of faith. 
They have carded its cotton by religion. 

2088. The bud which made its soul the veil of this 
secret, is a fountain of blood, when it opens its mouth. 

(167) 2089. How can the mouth attain to this dignity? 

The story of the Heart must be told by the tongue of the 
Heart; when it comes to the tongue, it is fire. 

2090. This food is wholesome in the bowl of the 
Heart; when it comes to the tongue, it is fire. 

2091. This dumbness is thine eloquence. Thy haste 
is to go slowly. 

2092. The enlightenment of the heart informs him 
who leaves speech to others. 

2093. Only the tongue of the Heart can translate 
the language of the Heart, which is its idiom. 

2094. If thou ownest the happy heart of Nezami, 
the whole of the empire of contentment is thine. 








THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


239 


NINETEENTH DISCOURSE 
On welcoming the next world 

2095. See the private assembly adorned, shining, and 
beautiful like a full moon, 

2096. Candles burning, and sweetmeats plentiful, the 
throne set up, and ambergris prepared. 

2097. The world is the enemy of thy life; withdraw 
thyself from its friendship. 

2098. See whom it has drawn to itself with chains. 
Whoso observed it, reproached it. 

2099. The guardians of the divine court cry aloud 
against thee who art worldly and hast abandoned religion, 

2100. Saying : “ Turn back from the door of the 
tyrants and approach the tabernacle of this mystery.” 

2101. Thou art burnt by the heat of this desert; they 
will not hide what thou, hast hidden. 

(168) 2102. The revengeful dog was spiteful. Was it for 

this that the fox grew fur? 

2103. This dark desert is a hell of burning sulphur; 
how happy is he who passes through it quickly. 

2104. Collect the water of thy mouth politely; spit 
it out at the fire of this spring of sulphur. 

2105. Give back this loan from heaven; give up this 
earth-born dust. 

2106. Skilfully throw all away, that thou mayest own 
nothing and be free. 

2107. He who walks proudly on this road, robs me 
and thee. 


240 MAKHZANOL ASRAR 

2108. The enmity of a scorpion is worse than that of 
a dragon, because one is hidden from thee, and the 
other is visible. 

2109. The house is full of thieves, hide thy jewels. 
The desert is full of demons, tell thy beads. 

‘2110. The plunderers on the road of the heart rob 
near the halting place. 

2111. I fear that, when they attack thee by night, they 
will expel thee humbled from this desert. 

2112. A small enemy is a great calamity; to neglect 
him is a grievous error. 

2113. Do not fight half-heartedly with a small enemy ; 
thou wilt be shattered, if thou art not sharp-sighted. 

2114. The ant blinds the lion cub, notwithstanding 
its insignificance and its lack of power. 

(169) 2115. The caravan of captives reached its destination; 

the loaded ship reached the shore. 

2116. Hide thyself like a sleep, that they may not 
see thee. Flow like water, that they may not drive thee. 

2117. One should not set foot in this monastery; if 
thou enterest, thou must return. 

2118. If thou wilt not go back, they will make thy 
heart bleed; they will leave thy rations outside this 
monastery. 

2119. If it were not a merit to leave the earth, heaven 
would not travel night and day. 

2120. Arise, that the demon may not tear thy collar. 
Take hold of the skirt of religion and take refuge in it. 

2121. The laws of religion call thee, listen to them; 
nature is not thine, abandon it. 








THE TBEASORY OF MYSTERIES 


241 


2122. The laws of religion are like a breeze, receive 
them in thy soul. Nature i-s dust, abandon it to the world. 

2123. The laws of religion have given sweet herbs into 
thy hands. Do not worship nature, worship only the 
laws of religion. 

2124. Do not gallop to every door like a breeze. Do 
not touch the point of every thorn like the air. 

2125. All these are like shadows, be thou like the 
light. If thou ownest everything, abandon all. 

2126. This revolving heaven is a noose round thy 
neck ; take heed how thou freest thy head from this noose. 

2127. If it explains its own condition to thee, or 
informs thee of its age, 

2128. Thy cave is too narrow for its deep thoughts; 
thy life is naught to its duration. 

(170) 2129. The end of thy speech is silence; the result of 

thy work is oblivion. 

2130. It is better that thou shouldst knock at the 
door of love, whilst thou livest in this world, 

2131. Because these few moments of thy wretched life 
are not happy except only through such wine. 

2132. The heavens have prepared no royal robe with¬ 
out taking away two lengths of cloth. 

2133. This quarrelsome heretical world will write 
against thee with a sharp-pointed pen whatever thou doest. 

2134. They will open the same door of kindness and 
tenderness to thee, as thou openest. 

2135. If thine eyes are curtains of evil, they play the 
same game with thee behind this curtain. 




242 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2136. Know thou well that those who have seen much 
good and evil, have not approved of evil. 

2137. He who passed along the road, gave some in¬ 
dication. He who did evil gave some pledge. 

2138. Whether thy outward appearance is good or bad, 
thy name will be that which thou takest with thee. 

2139. The name of a thistle is thorn; he who sells 
ambergris is called ambergris. 

2140. Be not worthless, that a.t the time of judgment 
thou mayest not be ashamed of thyself and before God. 

2141. Curse this world which burns the heart; throw 
a stone at this glass full of blood. 

(171) 2142. Stone this flaming player; draw the pen of 

abrogation through this word; 

2143. Conquer this fortress of tin; ride on this 
chequered pie-bald horse, 

2144. That heaven, from the pulpit of the nine taber¬ 
nacles, may read the proclamation of kingship in thy name. 

... 2145. Thy work is to lower the banner; mine is to 
raise it. 

2146. I am mankind and soar to angelic heights. I 
lay claim to that part of heaven. 

2147. My worth is greater than my stature ; my circuit 
is beyond this circle. 

2148. There is no water, but I rule the sea. I am 
not an owl, but I examine treasure. 

2149. Like the heavens, I have my foot on the 
treasure, therefore my place is very high. 







THE TKEASURY OF MYSTERIES 


243 


The story of Harunor Rashid and the barber 

2150. When Harun became Caliph, the Abbasid 
standard reached to the heavens. 

2151. One night he turned his back on his wife and 
his face to the comfort of the bath. 

2152. A barber who was shaving' his head, grieved 
him with every hair he cut, 

2153. Saying : “Oh thou, who art aware of my skill, 
choose me to-day for thy son-in-law. 

(172) 2154. “ Proclaim the marriage contract; betroth thy 

daughter to me, thy humble servant.” 

2155. The Caliph was somewhat annoyed; yet he 
exercised tolerance, 

2156. Saying: “The heat has inflamed his heart; 
he is struck with awe at my majesty. 

2157. “ He has lost his senses, therefore he talks so 
foolishly; otherwise he would not make such demands 
on me.” 

2158. Next day he tested him with greater care and 
found the same impress on the false coin. 

2159. He tried him thus several times, but his be¬ 
haviour did not change. 

2160. When the affairs of the wretch darkened the 
mind of the Caliph, he took the story to the minister for 
his instruction, 

2161. Saying : “I have suffered this indignity from 
a mere barber; the solution of this mystery must come 
from thee. 

2162. “ He aspires to be my son-in-law. See what 
his impertinence impels him to do! 







•244 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2163. “ He has a dagger in his mouth and a razor in 
his hand; it is unwise to entrust my head to two swords. 

2164. ‘ ‘ Whenever like fate he comes to me, he throws 
stones at me and at my jewel.” 

2165. The minister said : “ Thou art safe from his 
demands. Perhaps his foot is on a treasure. 

2166. “ When that simpleton comes to thee again, 
order him to step off from that place where he was stand¬ 
ing at first. 

2167. ‘‘ If he still offends thee, strike off the head 
of this barber; otherwise dig under the place where he 
stood at first.” 

(173) 2168. The obedient prince submissively changed the 

places accordingly. 

2169. When the barber stepped off from his first 
place, the Caliph saw his cheeks change colour. 

2170. He saw him dumb and speechless; his eyes and 
his tongue taught courtesy. 

2171. So long as his feet stood on a treasure, he saw 
his face royal in the mirror. 

2172. When he had no treasure under his feet, he was 
again himself, the barber. 

2173. They dug quickly under where he had stood; 
they found treasure under his feet. 

2174. He who stands on a treasure, reveals a treasure 
by his speech. 

2175. The treasure of Nezami, which shatters the 
talisman, is a pure heart and an enlightened mind. 



the treasury of mysteries 


245 


TWENTIETH DISCOURSE 
On the shamelessness of the people 

2176. Why are we who have abandoned self, sitting 
lowly in this dust? 

2177. Association with this dust has humbled thee ; 
the earth has made many such schemes. 

2178. Life has gone by, and we are left far behind ; 
we are stages behind the caravan. 

(174) 2179. These two angels are our captives, but because 

of our ill-fame, demons are our kindred. 

2180. We do our hot work coldly like a stoker. We 
are cold after heat like ashes. 

2181. Where is the light of the heart and the en¬ 
lightenment of the mind ? Where is the ease and comfort 
of the past? 

2182. The black morning of the day of resurrection 
has dawned. The banner of the dawn of life has vanished. 

2183. The laughter of negligence has died on the lips ; 
the spirit of the desire of life is broken. 

2184. See by what magic thou canst escape from the 
captivity of this earth. 

2185. Ely from this deadly snare; acumen provides 
for such escapes. 

2186. The wolf has stronger teeth than the fox; the 
fox escapes, because he is more intelligent. 

2187. Strive to be faithful and not to worship thyself 
but to worship God. 

2188. Be the dust of a faithful heart and the soil of 
justice which grows green herbs. 







246 


MAKHZANOL ASRAB 


2189. Every merit, learnt from the heart, is sewn 
into the selvedge of the cloth of fidelity. 

2190. If there is merit in man, it is a lost jewel, if 
thou dost not approve it. 

2191. If thou approvest it, it will change; the source 
of its water will be doubled. 

(175) 2192. Experienced men will cherish merit with their 

life, wherever they see it. 

2193. The dust of the world is purified only by merit, 
and this merit is not found in the world to-day. 

2194. If merit raises its head, the unworthy will lay 
hold on it. 

2195. They distress the soul of the meritorious, until 
they destroy his virtue. 

2196. They consider discipline to be mere outward 
show; they attribute madness to meditation. 

2197. Some base men have assumed the title of gene¬ 
rosity; the worthless slaves call themselves faithful. 

2198. They ridicule liberality, and they abuse elo¬ 
quence. 

2199. They draw the picture of fidelity on ice. They 
boast to the sun and the moon. 

2200. If a word is a balm of comfort, it wounds the 
hearts of such people. 

2201. If they drink sweetness from the lips of a man, 
they lay their diseased hands on his face. 

2202. They will pour vinegar, sour as unripe grapes, 
on a warm heart, sweet as figs. 

2203. The eyes of the people are blind to merit; they 
can only see defects and faults. 







THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


247 


2204. The harvest of the sea is not all pearls. One 
merit is enough for one man. 

(176) 2205. In the eyes of a blind man, the Tigris is but a 

drop of water. The leg of a locust is a great burden for 
an ant. 

2206. These who claim fame, seek faults; they have 
no merit, and they pity the virtuous. 

2207. In this earth they are darker than the essence 
of the clay; they bring more bitterness to the heart than 
grief. 

2208. If they reach the mind, they darken it like 
smoke ; if they reach a lamp, they are but a wind. 

2209. See the state of the world and who are its 
leaders, and who are chosen for renown. 

2210. These who dishonour their own cradle, break 
my heart as though it were their covenant. 

2211. I am lik e the moon in heaven; I shall not be 
broken. If I wane, I shall increase. 

2212. How can they cheat heaven in this game, even 
though they take endless pains? 

2213. Like the companions of Noah, they are the 
ancient enemies of eloquence which is fresher than the 
garden of the soul. 

2214. Wage war, oh standard of Khezr! Pray, oh 
sacred breath of Noah! 

2215. My heart wishes them no ill; if it remembers 
them, may it be forgotten. 

2216. My silence is a strong voice crying out against 
their limitless iniquity. 

(177) 2217. When the casket holds one pearl, it is full of 

sound; when it is full it is silent. 






248 


MAKHZANOL ASRAE 


2218. When a cask is half empty, it makes a noise; 
but it is silent when it is full. 

2219. If thou art full of learning, be silent; abandon 
speech and be all ears. 

The story of the nightingale and the falcon 

2220. When the roses were in flower, the nightingale 
spoke to the falcon on the lawn of the garden, 

2221. Saying : “ Thou art more silent than all other 
birds. How is it that thou hast won the game? Tell 
me the reason. 

2222. “ All thy life long, thou hast been silent and 
hast not opened thy lips to speak one fair word to any 
man. 

2223. “ Thy abode is the hand of Sanjar; thy food 
is the breast of the partridge. 

2224. “ Why should I who, in the twi nkl in g of an eye, 
bring forth a hundred beautiful pearls from the invisible 
mine of my heart, 

2225. “ Search for worms for food? Why should my 
nest be among thorns? ” 

2226. The falcon answered : “ Be all ears; watch my 
silence and be silent. 

2227. “ I who have some little experience, do a 
hundred things and speak of none. 

2228. “ Go, because thou art distracted by the world ; 
thou doest no action, and speakest of a thousand. 

2229. “ To me who am all reality, this hunting ground 
gives the breast of the partridge and the hand of the king. 

2230. Since thou hast so much to say, eat worms 
and sit on thorns; that is all.” 






THE TREASURY OR MYSTERIES 


249 


2231. Where they read a proclamation in the name of 
Eereidun, who will listen to the sound of a drum? 

2232. The dawn, heralded only by the crowing of a 
cock, is but a smile of pity. 

2233. No neck is free from the noose of the silent 
heavens. 

2234. Do not attempt the heights of sublime poetry, 
that thou mayest not be imprisoned in the city like 
Nezami. 

On the ending of the book 

(178) 2235. Oh scribe, may God bless thy morning. Since 

I have laid down my pen, take thou it up, 

2236. Because this design surpasses high heaven. It 
makes my pen paint many-coloured pictures. 

2237. I have made a dagger for the king, of all these 
diamonds which I have set, 

2238. Because the iron of my sword was still in the 
stone, and the forge of my smithy was small. 

2239. If the empire had been favourable to me, I 
should not have spent my life thus. 

2240. I feel in my heart that I have committed a sin 
in blackening these pages. 

2241. The product of a few nights of manifestation 
is found in this royal bridal chamber. 

2242. Eat of this roast lamb ; why be satisfied with 
smoke? Burn up all the salted meat. 

2243. Go further, but go slowly. If thou ponderest, 
ponder deeply. 

2244. Erase any word which lacks courtesy and 
eloquence, because this is my wish. 






250 


MAKHZANOL ASRAR 


2245. Draw the pen through whatsoever raises its 
banner against knowledge, even though it were myself. 

2246. If in it I have not done justice to speech, I 
would not have it sent from city to city. 

(179) 2247. Eloquence has shackled me in this place, but 

all places are under my hand. 

2248. Providence said : “ Thou art not earth, move 
on. How long wilt thou sit still like the earth? Move 
on.” 

2249. My virgin eloquence which is peerless, has no 
garment long enough to clothe herself. 

2250. The short garments reach only to her knee; 
therefore she kneels. 

2251. She should be garbed in silk brocade, that it 
may be fitting for her to stand upright. 

2252. What do I gain in the eyes of old and young 
but a voice? 

2253. The market was noisy, but there was no gold; 
I had the toil of the market place and nothing more. 

2254. Ganjeh has imprisoned me; otherwise the 
treasury of Eraq would have been mine with ease. 

2255. The whole world has cried out saying : ‘‘Oh 
young man, where is Ganjeh, and who is Nezami? ” 

2256. Praise be to God, that this book has reached 
its end; the greater part of life is over. 

2257. Nezami has covered it with jewels from head 
to foo-t to beautify it. 

2258. May his scattering of jewels be blessed to the 
king to whom this gem belongs. 






THE TREASURY OF MYSTERIES 


251 


(180) 2259. The bird of the pen opened its wings on the 

paper and flew off with the book. 

2260. He bent his head and scattered pearls from his 
lips; he completed Makhzanol Asrar. 

2261. Reckoning correctly, it was, in truth, the twenty- 
fourth of the First Rabi’. 

2262. From the time of Hejrat to this time, five 
hundred and seventy-two years have passed. 





INDEX TO 

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF NEZAMI OF GANJEH 


Abbas, 72, 73 

Abbasid Caliphs, see Caliphs 
Abdollah, son of Meimun, 82 
Abhar, 76 
Abkhaz, 75, 76, 77 
Abol Mozaffar Shirvan Shah, 
see Akhsetan Shirvan Shah 
Abu Ali, son of Moqtafi, 68 
Abu Bakr (Caliph), 32, 44 
Abu Bakr Nosratod-Din, Mo’- 
aiyad, son of Mohammad 
Jahan Pahlevan (Atabek), 
21, 29, 49, 52, 59, 61, 75, 
79, 81 

Abu Ja’far Mohammad, see 
Mohammad Jahan Pah¬ 
levan 

Abu Lahab, 35 
Abu Mohammad Elyas, son 
of Yusof, son of Mo’aiyad 
= Nezami, 5, 35 
Agha Ahmad Ali, 14 
Ahvaz, 82 
Akhi Faraj, 5 

Akhsetan Shirvan Shah, 32, 
33, 34, 37, 51, 52, 62 
Alamut (Fortress), 84 
Alanjaq (Fortress), 80 
Ala’od-Din Hosein (Ghurid 
King), 85, 86 

Ala od-Din Mohammad (son 
of Takesh), see Moham¬ 
mad Kharazm Shah 
Ala’od-Din Qezel Arsalan, 39, 
40 

Aleppo, 82 


Alexander the Great, 2, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 52 
Ali (Caliph), 7, 32, 44, 71 
Alp Arsalan, 5 
Amir Khosrou of Delhi, 2, 4 
Anushtegin (Kharazm Shah), 
81 

Anvari (Poet), 22, 77 
Aqsonqor, 39, 40 
Aqsonqor, son of Khas Beig, 

74 

Archimedes, Mistress of, 60 
Arefi (Poet), 4 
Armenia, 40, 59, 61 
Arran, 85 

Arsalan Peighu, son of Saljuq, 

58 

Arsalan Shah, son of Mas’ud 
(Ghaznavid), 85 
Arsalan Shah (Saljuq), son of 
Toghrel, son of Moham¬ 
mad, son of Malek Shah 
(adopted son of Ildegez), 

18,74,75,76,77,79 

Arzanjan, 8 

Arzerum, Saljuqs of, 58 
Asia Minor, Saljuqs of, 58, 61 
Assassins, 1, 41, 66, 67, 76, 
84, see also Esma’ilis 
Astrologers, Astrology, 21,22, 
38, 39 

Astronomy, J 7, 21, 22, 39, 50 
Atabeks of Azarbaijan, !, 66, 

78-81 

Atash Kadeh, 5, 6, 15, 87 
Atsiz (Governor of Kharazm), 
70, 71 




INDEX 


253 


Attar (Faridod-Din), 2 
Attar, Zahirod-Din, 69 
Azarbaijan, 40, 59, 66, 68, 72, 
73,74,75,77,78,79,80,81 
Azed Abu Mohammad Ab- 
dollah (Fatemid Caliph), 

82, 83 


Caliphs, Four, 17, 32, see also 
Abu Bakr, Ali, Omar, 
Osman 

Changiz Khan, 22 
Char Sofeh, 76 
Crusaders, 82, 83 , 84 


Bacher, Dr. Wilhelm, 38, 51 
Baghdad, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 
72, 73, 80, 82, 83, 84 
Baharestan, 5 

Bahram, see Bahrain Shah, 
Fakhrod-Din 

Bahram Nameh, see Haft 
Peikar 

Bahram Shah, Fakhrod-Din, 
son of Davud, 4, 8, 9, 10, 

11, 85 

Bahram Shah (Ghaznavid), 10, 

85, 86 

Balkh, 70, 71 
Barthold, W., 51 
Berthels, E., 51 
Bisotun, 21 
Bokhara, 45 
Bokhari, 40 

Book of Alexander, see Es- 
kandar Nameh 
Bozorg Omid (Esma’ili), 84 
Browne, Prof. E. G., 37, 38, 
51 

Buzabeh (Governor of Ispa¬ 
han), 73 


Cairo, 82, 83 

Caliphs, Abbasid, of Bagh¬ 
dad, 66-70, 71, 72, 82, 83, 


84 

Caliphs, Fatemid, of Egypt, 

66, 81-83, 84 


Darband, Ruler of, 24, 60 
David, 8 
Davud, 58 

Davud (Ruler of Arzanjan), 8, 

11 

Delhi, 2, 4 

Divan of Nezami, 1, 6, 32 
Doulat Shah, 6, 22, 87 
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 46 


Ebrahim (Ghaznavid), 86 
Egypt, 66, 81, 82, 83, 84 
Elyas, see Abu Mohammad 
Elyas = Nezami 
Emamate, 84 

Encyclopaedia of Islam, 51 
Eqbal, 61,62 

Eqbal Nameh, 49, 50, 55, 56, 
59, 64 

Erak, 15, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 79, 80, 81 
Eram, 52 

Eskandar Nameh (Book of 
Alexander), 1, 5, 13, 14, 
43-66 

Esma’ilis, 9, 66, 67, 82, 84, 85, 
see also Assassins 
Ezzod-Din, 58, 59, 61, 64 
Ezzod-Din Balban (Shah of 
Armenia), 58, 61 
Ezzod-Din Kei-Kavus I (Sal- 
juq of Arzerum), 58 
Ezzod-Din Mas ud I (Atabek 
of Musel), 59, 61 






254 


INDEX 


Ezzod-Din Mas’ud II (Atabek 
of Musel), 59 

Fa ez Abol Qasem Isa 
(Fatemid Caliph), 82 
Faiyazi, 3 
Falaki Shervani, 51 
Farang (= France, i.e. Eu¬ 
rope, the West), 52 
Farhad, 21 
Fars, 72 

Faruq, see Omar (Caliph) 
Fatemeh, 82 

Fatemid Caliphs, see Caliphs 
Fath Ali Khan, Mirza (Poet), 
4 

Ferdousi, 2, 6, 18, 21, 39, 48, 
49, 66 

Five Treasures, see Khamseh 

Ganjeh, I, 3, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
24,41,45,58,74,81 
Ghaznavids, 1, 66, 85, 86 
Ghazneh (Ghaznin), 10, 71, 
85, 86 

Gheyasod-Din (Ghurid Go¬ 
vernor of Ghaznavid Terri¬ 
tory), 86 

Ghoz Tribes, 70, 71 
Ghur, 71, 85, 86 
Ghurid Kings, 85, 86 
God, 2, 16, 17, 23, 25, 28, 29, 
32, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43, 
44, 46, 48, 52, 60, 64, 65, 
78, 84, 87 

Habibos Seyar, 66, 72 
Hadiqeh, 2, 10 
Hafez, 3, 37 
Haft Asman, 14 
Haft Peikar, 1, 2, 6, 38-43, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 59 
Haji Khalifeh, 6, 14 


Haji Lotf Ali Beig, 5, 15 
Hal Nameh, 4 

Hamdaniyan (Hamduniyan), 
28, 29, 41 

Hamedan, 68, 72 , 73 , 74 75 
76, 79, 80. 84 
Hasan, Hadi, 51 
Hasan, son of Mohammad, 
son of Bozorg Omid 
(Leader of Assassins), 84 
Hashemi of Kerman (Poet), 3 
Hashish, 84 

Hashishin (Assassins), 84 
Hatefi (Poet), 4 
Holvan, 73 

Hosein (Governor of the Pro¬ 
vince of Ghur), 86 
Huart, C. L., 51 

Il-Arsalan, son of Atsiz (Kha- 
razm Shah), 71 

Ildegez (Atabek), 19, 59, 72, 
74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81 
Inanej, Hosamod-Din (Gover¬ 
nor of Rei), 75, 76 
India, 85, 86 
Isaac, 9 
Islam, 84 

Ispahan, 67, 72, 73 , 74, 75 
Jahan Ara, 6 

Jahan Pahlevan, see Abu 
Bakr Nosratod-Din and 
Mohammad Jahan Pah¬ 
levan 

Jalalod-Din Hasan (son of 
Ala’od-Din Hosein), 85 
Jami, 2, 4, 5 
Jand (Province), 71 
Jaxartes, 71 

Jesus, 18, 35, 36, 61 , see also 
Messiah 






INDEX 


255 


Jews, 35 
Joseph, 35 


Ka’beh, 68 
Kak (Fortress), 75 
Kei-Qobad, King, 39 
Kerman, 3, 4, 71 
Khajeh Emad of Khoi, 56 
Khajeh Hasan (Khajeh Omar, 
uncle of Nezami), 1, 16, 
36, 37 

Khaju of Kerman (Poet), 4 
Khamseh (Five Treasures), 1, 

^ 4, 5, 6, 7, 41, 54 

Khaqani, 51 
Kharazm, 70, 71, 81 
Kharazm Shahs (Empire), 1, 

66, 70, 71, 76, 77, 81 
Khas Beig, 74 
Khezr (Prophet), 27, 48 
Khiveh, 71 
Khoi, 56 

Khorasan, 22, 85 
Khosrou Malek, son of Khos- 
rou Shah (Ghaznavid), 86 
Khosrou Shah, son of Bahram 
Shah (Ghaznavid), 86 
Khosrou Shirin, 1, 2, 5, 6, 16 
to 31, 33, 37, 38, 51, 59, 
60, 62 

Khotbeh, 67, 68, 83 
Khuzestan, 74 

Kordestan, Saljuqs of, 72, 75, 
77, 79 


Lahore, 86 
Lane Poole, 51 
Leili Majnun, 1, 2, 5, 1 1, 32 
to 38, 47, 51, 60, 61 
Lodge, Sir Oliver, 46 
Lotf Ali Beig, 87 


Magians, 17 
Mahdiyeh, 82 
Mahmud (of Ghazneh), 18 
Makhzanol Asrar, 1, 2, 4, 5, 
6, 7-16, 20, 29, 34, 51, 85 
MSalek Shah (Great Saljuq), 
66, 70, 72, 74, 77, 81 
Malek Shah, son of Mahmud 
(Saljuq of Erak), 68, 73, 74 
Malta, 82 

Mansur Mohammad (King of 
Armenia), 40 
Manteqot Teir, 2 
Maragheh, 66, 67 
Marv, 70, 71 
Mary, Virgin, 40, 61 
Masnavi, 4, 54 
Mas’ud, King, 64 
Mas’ud, son of Mohammad, 
son of Malek Shah, 66, 67, 
68, 72, 73, 74, 78, 81 
Mas’ud (III), son of Ebrahim 
(Ghaznavid), 86 
Matla’ol Anvar, 2 
Mathematics, 21, 50 
Mazanderan, 75, 76 
Meimun, 82 

Menuchehr III., King, son of 
Akhsetan Shirvan Shah, 
34, 51 

Mer’atol Kheyal, 87 
Mesopotamia, 72 
Messiah, 35, 40, see also Jesus 
Mir-e Miran, son of Moham¬ 
mad Jahan Pahlevan, 79 
Mohammad, Atabek, see Mo¬ 
hammad Jahan Pahlevan 
Mohammad Jahan Pahlevan, 
Abu Ja’far (Atabek), 19, 
20, 21 ,,25, 26, 29, 49, 59, 
61, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 81 

Mohammad (Kharazm) Shah, 
Ala’od-Din, 70, 71 





256 INDEX 


Mohammad, the Prophet, 7, 
12, 13, 16, 17, 35, 37, 44, 
82, 84 

Mohammad, son of Bozorg, 
Omid (Leader of Assas¬ 
sins), 84 

Mohammad, son of Hasan, 
son of Mohammad, son of 
Bozorg Omid (Leader of 
Assassins), 84 

Mohammad, son of Mahmud 
(Saljuq), 68, 74 
Mohammad, son of Malek 
Shah, 66, 72, 74, 77 
Mohammad, son of Nezami, 
33, 61,62, see also Nezami, 
Son 

Mohammad, son of Toghrel, 
son of Mohammad, son of 
Malek Shah, 77 
Mongols, 1, 70 
Moqbel, 61, 62 
Moqtafi (Caljph of Baghdad), 
67, 68, 72, 73 
Moses, 18 

Moslems, 50, 66, 82, 83 
Mostanjed, son of Moqtafi, 
(Caliph of Baghdad), 68, 
69 

Mostarshed (Caliph of Bagh¬ 
dad), 66, 67, 72 
Mostazi, son of Mostanjed 
(Caliph of Baghdad), 69, 
83 

Musel, 40, 61,64, 67, 69, 74 

Nafahatol Ons, 2, 5 
Nahrevan, 67 

Najmod-Din Aiyub (Father of 
Saladin), 83 

Naser (Caliph of Baghdad), 
70, 71, 80 

Naser-e Khosrou, 82 


Nezami, Birth, 1, 7, 12, 13, 

14, 15, 63, 85 

Nezami, Birthplace, 1, 5, 14, 

15, 58, 84 

Nezami, Death, 1, 5, 6, 7, 13, 
14, 50, 65, 85 
Nezami, Father, I, 15, 36 
Nezami, Mother, 1, 36 
Nezami, Son, 1,16, 24, 25, 33, 
34, 36, 38, 41, 53, 54, 55, 
61, 62 

Nezami, Uncle, I, 16, 36, 37 
Nezami, Wives, 1, 24, 26, 51, 
56, 59, 60, 61 
Nishapur, 70, 71 
Noah, 12 
North Africa, 82 
Nosratod-Din Abu Bakr (Ja- 
han Pahlevan), see Abu 
Bakr Nosratod-Din 
Nurod-Din Arsalan Shah 
(Atabek of Musel), 40, 59, 
64 

Nurod-Din Mahmud (Zangi), 
82, 83 

Omar (Caliph), 7, 32, 44 
Osman (Caliph), 32, 44 
Oxus, 70 

Palestine, 52 
Par viz, 21 

Persia, I, 2, 4, 19, 21, 22, 24, 
36, 38, 42, 51, 66, 70, 71, 
78, 81, 84, 86 
Prophet, see Mohammad 

Qara Khata’is, 70, 71 
Qara Sonqor, 72 
Qasemi (Poet), 4 
Qazvin, 76, 81 

Qeimaz, Ezzod-Din (Gover¬ 
nor of Ispahan), 75 









INDEX 


257 


Qeimaz, Qotbod-Din, 69 

Qeirovan, 82 

Qelej Arsalan Davud (Saljuq), 
58 

Qelej Arsalan II., Ezzod-Din 
(Saljuq), 61 

Qepchaq (Province), 78 

Qepteh Khatun (Wife of Mo¬ 
hammad fahan Pahlevan), 
80 

Qezel Arsalan, son of Ildegez 

(Atabek), 20, 21,25, 29, 30, 
31, 40, 56, 57, 75, 77, 79, 
80,81,87 

Qohestan, 14, 58, 84 

Qom, 1, 5, 14, 15, 58, 74, 81 

Qor’an, 3 

Qotlogh Inanej, son of Mo¬ 
hammad Jahan Pahlevan), 
76, 77, 79, 80, 81 


Rahatos Sodur, 66 
Ra’iseh (Mother of Nezami), 
1, 36 

Rashed, son of Mostarshed 
(Caliph of Baghdad), 67, 
72, 84 

Rei, 72, 73, 75, 76 
Religion, 7, 36, 46, 47, 50 
Rieu, 14, 30, 31, 37, 49 
Rome, 52, 60 
Rouzatos Safa, 66 
Rumi, Jalalod-Din, 54 
Rus (Russia), 60 

Sa’di, 42 

Saladin, see Salahod-Din 
Salahod-Din Yusof, son of 
Najmod-Din Aiyub (Sala¬ 
din), 82, 83 
Saljuq, 58 
Saljuq Shah, 72 


Saljuqs, Great, I, 70-71, 74 
Saljuqs of Asia Minor, see 
Asia Minor 

Saljuqs of Erak, Kordestan, 
and Azarbaijan, 66 67 

68, 71, 72-77, 78, 79, 81 
Samarqand, 71 
Sana’i (Poet), 2, 10, 85 
Sanjar (Great Saljuq), 1, 22, 
70, 71, 72, 85 

Sanjar, son of Soleiman Shah, 
80 

Saqi Nameh, 36 
Seddiq, see Abu Bakr 
(Caliph) 

Seiyed Ata’ol Molk of Ta- 
rand, 71 
Shabdiz, 21 
Shahanshah Nameh, 4 
Shah Nameh (of Ferdousi), 2, 
34, 39, 49 

Shah Nameh (of Qasemi), 4 
Shamsod-Din Mohammad, 27 
Shapur, 83 

Sharaf Nameh-ye-Khosrovan, 

43-55, 59, 62 

Sharafod-Din of Ispahan 
(Poet), 77 
Shi’as, 3, 4 
Shiraz, 72 

Shirin, see Khosrou Shirin 
Shir Khan, 87 
Shir Kuh, Asadod-Din, 83 
Shir van, 51 

Shirvan Shah, see Akhsetan 
Shirvan Shah 
Shirvan Shahs, 51 
Shoja’od-Din (Ghurid Gover¬ 
nor of Ghaznavid Terri¬ 
tory), 86 
Sicily, 82 

Sobh-e Sadeq, 6, 14 



258 


INDEX 


Soleiman, son of Moham¬ 
mad, son of Malek Shah 
(Saljuq of Erak), 72, 73, 
74, 75, 79 
Solomon, 8, 40 
Sunni(s), 3, 4, 7, 16, 18, 44, 
66, 76 

Syria, 82, 83 

Tabari, 40 
Tabriz, 80 
Tafresh, 5, 15 

Takesh (Kharazm Shah), 71, 
76, 77, 81 
Taqi Kashi, 6 
Tarikh-e Gozideh, 66 
Tazkeratosh Sho’ara, 22, 87 
Tigris, 15, 69 

Toghrel (1), son of Moham¬ 
mad, son of Malek Shah 
(Saljuq), 74, 77, 78, 79 
Toghrel (II), son of Arsalan 
Shah (Saljuq), 18, 19, 25, 
66, 71, 77, 79, 80, 81 


Tohfatol Ahrar, 2 
Transoxiana, 22, 70 
Treasury of Mysteries, see 
Makhzanol Asrar 
Turan, 22 
Turkestan, 22 

Uzbek Pahlevan, son of Mo¬ 
hammad Jahan Pahlevan, 
79 

Wine, 27, 36, 37, 45, 46, 47, 
50, 52 

Yusof and Zoleikha, 2 
Yusof, son of Zaki, son of 
Mo’aiyad (Father of Ne- 
zami), 1, 36 

Zafer Abol Mansur Esma’il 
(Fatemid Caliph), 81 
Zambaur, E. de, 51 
Zangid Ruler, 82, 83 
Zoroastrians, 17, 30 


Robert Stockwell, 5-7, Baden Place, London, S.E.l. England. 
