

THE CONFERENCE OF 
THE BIRDS 




RENDERED INTO ENGLISH FROM 
THE LITERAL AND COMPLETE FRENCH TRANSLATION 
OF GARCIN DE TASSY BY 

C S. NOTT 

Copyright © 1954 by C. S. Nott 
First published by The Janus Press, 1954 
First Shambala edition, July 1971 


This book is published in the Clear Light Series 
dedicated to W.Y. Evans-Wentz. The series is under the 
joint editorship of Samuel Bercholz and Michael Fagan. 


Cover design by Arthur Okamura 
Brush drawings by Kate Adamson 
Covers printed at Cranium Press, San Francisco. 
Text printed and bound by IPCO, Ashland, Oregon. 


ISBN 0-87773-031-8 
SHAMBALA PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
1409 Fifth Street, Berkeley, California, 94710 


CONTENTS 


Foreword page vii 

I. Invocation i 

II. The Birds Assemble 8 

III. The Conference of the Birds ii 

Epilogue 1 3 5 

Attar 137 

A note on the Sufis 139 

Glossary 141 



1 


t 


FOREl^ORD 


Attar s great philosophical religious poem, Mantiq Uttair, ipas 
composed probably in the second half of the twelfth century A,D. 
Since then, a new edition has appeared every few years in one or 
another of the countries of the Near East, 

The present rendering was undertaken in the first instance for the 
benefit of myself and some friends; but it is the fullest version that 
has yet appeared in English and, as such, may interest a wider public. 
For the most part I have used Garcin de Tassy's translation into 
French prose from the Persian, which was collated with Arabic^ 
Hindu, and Turkish texts (Paris, 1863). / have also consulted a 
Persian text through a Sufi friend, together with extant English 
translations. Of these latter there are three, all very much abridged. 
The first is by Edward Fitzgerald, in rhyme, and rather senti- 
mental; the second is a very literal translation of i , 1 70 couplets of 
the original 4,674 Mathnawi, by Ghulam Muhammad Abid Shaikh, 
India, 1911; the third (and the best of the three') is MasanPs, in 
prose, though only about half of the original was translated; this was 
printed and published in Mangalore, India, 1924, and sheets were 
imported and published by the Oxford University Press, All three 
have long been out of print. Garcin de TassyT translation is com- 
plete, and, as he says, ^is as literal as I have been able to ?}2ake it 
intelligible'. He has also retained the favour, the spirit, and the 
teaching of Attar's poem. 

I have omitted the second half of the Invocation — which is missing 
fro??i the Hindu text and is abridged in the Turkish. The Epilogue 
is omitted entirely from the Hindu and the Turkish texts, and varies 
in other ?nanuscripts; of this I have included only the first part, since 
the rest, consisting as it does of anecdotes, comes as an anticlimax. 
Also omitted or condensed are a few anecdotes in the story, either 
because they seem repetitive, or because the meaning is obscure. But 


(viii) 

all that relates to the ' ConferetJce\ ^Speech\ ^l^anguage\ "Dis- 
course' or "Parllamut' (as It Is variously called) of the Birds as 
told in the original manuscript ^ is here. 

All notes on the text are included in the Glossary so that the 
reading shall not be interrupted; these include some of Tassy's. In 
compiling this^ and in writing the notes on Attar and on the SufiSy 
I have consulted^ among other sources. The Dictionary of Islam 
and the Encyclopaedia of Islam. In numbering the sections I have 
followed T assy's translation of the original manuscripts. If the reader 
will run through the Glossary before reading the book many allusions 
will be made clearer; though, as Tassy himself remarks, the meaning 
is sometimes obscure. 

Miss Adamson's brush drawings are based on those in an old 
Persian manuscript of Mantiq Uttair. 

c. S. NOTT 


I. INVOCATION 


RAISE to the Holy Creator, who has placed his throne 



upon the waters, and who has made all terrestrial 


JL creatures. To the Heavens he has given dominion and 
to the Earth dependence; to the Heavens he has given 
movement, and to the Earth uniform repose. 

He raised the firmament above the earth as a tent, with- 
out pillars to uphold it. In six days he created the seven 
planets and with two letters he created the nine cupolas of 
the Heavens. 

In the beginning he gilded the stars, so that at night the 
heavens might play tric-trac. 

With diverse properties he endowed the net of the body, 
and he has put dust on the tail of the bird of the soul. 

He made the Ocean liquid as a sign of bondage, and the 
mountain tops are capped with ice for fear of him. 

He dried up the bed of the sea and from its stones brought 
forth rubies, and from its blood, musk. 

To the mountains he has given peaks for a dagger, and 
valleys for a belt; so that they lift up their heads in pride. 

Sometimes he makes clusters of roses spring from the face 
of the fire; 

Sometimes he throws bridges across the face of the waters. 

He caused a mosquito to sting Nimrod his enemy who 
thereby suffered for four hundred years. 

In his wisdom he caused the spider to spin his web to 
protect the highest of men. 

He squeezed the waist of the ant so that it resembled a 
hair, and he made it a companion of Solomon; 

He gave it the black robes of the Abbasides and a garment 
of unwoven brocade worthy of the peacock. 


( 2 ) 

When he saw that the carpet of nature was defective he 
pieced it together fittingly. 

He stained the sword with the colour of the tulip; and 
from vapour made a bed of water-lilies. 

He drenched clods of earth with blood so that he might 
take from them cornelians and rubies. 

Sun and Moon — one* the day, the other the night, bow to 
the dust in adoration; and from their worship comes their 
movement. It is God who has spread out the day in white- 
ness, it is he who has folded up the night and blackened it. 

To the parrot he gave a collar of gold; and the hoopoe 
he made a messenger of the W'ay. 

The firmament is like a bird beating its wings along the 
way God has marked out for him, striking the Door with 
his head as with a hammer. 

God has made the firmament to revolve — night follows 
day and day the night. 

\XTen he breathes on clay man is created; and from a 
little vapour he forms the world. 

Sometimes he causes the dog to go before the traveller; 
sometimes he uses the cat to show the \X av. 

Sometimes he gives the power of Solomon to a staff; 
sometimes he accords eloquence to the ant. 

From a staff he produces a serpent; and by means of a 
staff he sends forth a torrent of water. 

He has placed in the firmament the orb of the proud, and 
binds it with iron when glowing red it wanes. 

He brought forth a camel from a rock, and made the 
golden calf to bellow. 

In winter he scatters the silver snow; in autumn, the gold 
of yellow leaves. 

He lays a cover on the thorn and tinges it with the colour 
of blood. 

To the jasmine he gives four petals and on the head of 
the tulip he puts a red bonnet. 


( 5 ) 

He places a golden crown on the brow of the narcissus; 
and drops pearls of dew into her shrine. 

At the idea of God the mind is baffled, reason fails; 
because of God the heavens turn, the earth reels. 

From the back of the fish to the moon every atom is a 
witness to his Being. 

The depths of earth and the heights of heaven render him 
each their particular homage. 

God produced the wind, the earth, the fire, and blood, 
and by these he announces his secret. 

He took clay and kneaded it with water, and after forty 
mornings placed therein the spirit which vivified the body. 

God gave it intelligence so that it might have discernment 
of things. 

When he saw that intelligence had discernment, he gave 
it knowledge, so that it might weigh and ponder. 

But when man came in possession of his faculties he con- 
fessed his impotence, and was overcome with amazement, 
while his body gave itself up to exterior acts. 

Friends or enemies, all bow the head under the yoke which 
God, in his wisdom, imposes; and, a thing astonishing, he 
watches over us all. 

At the beginning of the centuries God used the mountains 
as nails to fix the Earth ; and washed Earth’s face with the 
water of Ocean. Then he placed Earth on the back of a bull, 
the bull on a fish, and the fish on the air. But on what rested 
the air? On nothing. But nothing is nothing — and all that 
is nothing. Admire then, the works of the Lord, though he 
himself considers them as nothing. And seeing that His 
Essence alone exists it is certain there is nothing but Him. 
His throne is on the waters and the world is in the air. But 
leave the waters and the air, for all is God: the throne and 
the world are only a talisman. God is all, and things have 
only a nominal value; the world visible and the world 
invisible are only Himself. 


( 4 ) 

There is none but Him. But, alas, no one can see Him. 
The eyes are blind, even though the world be lighted by a 
brilliant sun. Should you catch even a glimpse of Him you 
would lose your wits, and if you should see Him completely 
you would lose your self. 

All men who are aware of their ignorance tuck up the 
flap of their garment and say earnestly: ‘O thou who art not 
seen although thou makest us to know thee, everyone is 
thou and no other than thou is manifested. The soul is 
hidden in the body, and thou art hidden in the soul. O thou 
who art hidden in that which is hidden, thou art more than 
all. All see themselves in thee and they see thee in every- 
thing. Since thy dwelling is surrounded by guards and 
sentinels how can we come near to thy presence? Neither 
mind nor reason can have access to thy essence, and no one 
knows thy attributes. Because thou art eternal and perfect 
thou art always confounding the wise. What can we say 
more, since thou art not to be described!’ 

O my heart, if you wish to arrive at the beginning of 
understanding, walk carefully. To each atom there is a dif- 
ferent door, and for each atom there is a different way which 
leads to the mysterious Being of whom I speak. To know 
oneself one must live a hundred lives. But you must know 
God by Himself and not by you; it is He who opens the way 
that leads to Him, not human wisdom. The knowledge of 
Him is not at the door of rhetoricians. Knowledge and 
ignorance are here the same, for they cannot explain nor can 
they describe. The opinions of men on this arise only in their 
imagination; and it is absurd to try to deduce anything from 
what they say: whether ill or well, they have said it from 
themselves. God is above knowledge and beyond evidence, 
and nothing can give an idea of his Holy Majesty. 

O you who value the truth, do not look for an analogy; 
the existence of this Being without equal does not admit of 
one. Since neither the prophets nor the heavenly messengers 


( 5 ) 

have understood the least particle, they have bowed their 
foreheads on the dust, saying: ‘We have not known thee as 
thou must truly be.’ 

What am I then, to flatter myself that I know Him? 

O ignorant son of the first man, the Khalif of God on 
earth, strive to participate in the spiritual knowledge of your 
father. All creatures that God draws out from nothingness 
for their existence prostrate themselves before him. When 
he wished to create Adam, he made him go out from behind 
a hundred veils, and he said to him, ‘O Adam, all creatures 
adore me; be adored in your turn.’ The only one who 
turned from this adoration was transformed from an angel 
into a demon. He was cursed and had no knowledge of the 
secret. His face became black and he said to God: ‘O thou 
who art in possession of absolute independence, do not 
abandon me.’ 

The Most High replied: ‘You who are cursed, know that 
Adam is both my steward and the king of nature. Today 
go before him, and tomorrow burn for him the ispand.’ 

When the soul was joined to the body it was part of the 
all: never has there been so marvellous a talisman. The soul 
had a share of that which is high, and the body a share of 
that which is low; it was formed of a mixture of heavy clay 
and pure spirit. By this mixing, man became the most 
astonishing of mysteries. We do not know nor do we 
understand so much as a little of our spirit. If you wish to 
say something about this, it would be better to keep silent. 
Many know the surface of this ocean, but they understand 
nothing of the depths; and the visible world is the talisman 
which protects it. But this talisman of bodily obstacles will 
be broken at last. You will find the treasure when the talis- 
man disappears; the soul will manifest itself when the body 
is laid aside. But your soul is another talisman; it is, for this 
mystery, another substance. Walk then in the way I shall 
indicate, but do not ask for an explanation. 


( 6 ) 

In this vast ocean the world is an atom and the atom a 
world. Who knows which is of more value here, the corne- 
lian or the pebble? 

We have staked our life, our reason, our spirit, our reli- 
gion, in order to understand the perfection of an atom. Sew 
up your lips and ask nothing of the empyrean or the throne 
of God. No one really knows the essence of the atom — ask 
whom you will. The Heavens are like a cupola upside down, 
without stability, at once moving and unmoving. One is lost 
in contemplation of such a mystery — it is veil upon veil; 
one is like a figure painted on a wall, and one can only bite 
the back of one’s hand. 

Consider those who have entered in the way of the Spirit. 
Look what has happened to Adam; see how many years he 
spent in mourning. Contemplate the deluge of Noah and all 
that patriarch suffered at the hands of the wicked. Consider 
Abraham, who was full of love for God : he suffered tortures 
and was thrown into the fire. See the unfortunate Ishmael 
offered up in the way of divine love. Turn towards Jacob 
who became blind from weeping for his son. Look at 
Joseph, admirable in his power as in his slavery, in the pit 
and in prison. Remember the unhappy Job stretched on the 
earth a prey to worms and wolves. Think of Jonah who, 
having strayed from the Way, went from the moon to the 
belly of the fish. Follow Moses from his birth: a box served 
him for a cradle, and Pharaoh exalted him. Think of David, 
who made himself a breast-plate and whose sighs melted the 
iron like wax. Look at Solomon whose empire was mastered 
by the Jinn. Remember Zacharias, so ardent with the love 
of God that he kept silent when they killed him; and John 
the Baptist, despised before the people, whose head was put 
on a platter. Stand in wonder at Christ at the foot of the 
cross, v/hen he saved himself from the hands of the Jews. 
And finally, ponder over all that the Chief of the Prophets 
suffered from the insults and injuries of the wicked. 


( 7 ) 

After this, do you think it will be easy to arrive at a 
knowledge of spiritual things? It means no less than to die 
to everything. What shall I say further, since there is nothing 
more to say, and there remains not a rose on the bush ! O 
Wisdom! You are no more than a suckling child; and the 
reason of the old and experienced strays in this quest. How 
shall I, a fool, be able to arrive at this Essence; and if I 
should arrive, how shall I be able to enter in by the door? 
O Holy Creator! Vivify my spirit! Believers and unbelievers 
are equally plunged in blood, and my head turns as the 
heavens, I am not without hope but I am impatient. 

My friends! We are neighbours of one another: I wish 
to repeat my discourse to you day and night, so that you 
should not cease for a moment to long to set out in quest 
of Truth. 



II. THE BIRDS ASSEMBLE 


WELCOME, O Hoopoe! You who were a guide to King 
Solomon and the true -messenger of the valley, who had the 
good fortune to go to the borders of the Kingdom of Sheba. 
Your warbling speech with Solomon was delightful; being 
his companion you obtained a crown of glory. You must 
put in fetters the demon, the tempter, and having done this 
will enter the palace of Solomon. 

O Wagtail, you who resemble Moses I Lift up your head 
and make your shawm resound to celebrate the true know- 
ledge of God. Like Moses you have seen the fire from afar; 
you are really a little Moses on Mount Sinai. My discourse 
is sans words, sans tongue, sans sound; understand it then, 
sans mind, sans ear. 

Welcome, O Parrot! In your beautiful robe and collar of 
fire, this collar is fitting for a dweller in the underworld but 
your robe is worthy of Heaven. Can Abraham save himself 
from the fire of Nimrod? Break the head of Nimrod and 
become the friend of Abraham, who was the friend of God. 
When you have been delivered from the hands of Nimrod 
put on your robe of glory and fear not the collar of fire. 

Welcome, O Partridge! You who walk so graciously, and 
are content when you fly over the mountains of divine 
knowledge. Lift yourself up in joy and consider the benefits 
of the Way. Knock with the hammer on the door of the 
house of God; and humbly melt down the mountains of 
your per\^erse desires so that the camel can come out. 

Salutations, O Falcon Royal! You of piercing sight, how 
long will you remain so violent and passionate? Fasten your 
talons to the letter of eternal love but do not break the seal 
until eternity. Mix your spirit with reason and see the 
eternity of before and after as one. Break your vile carcase 


( 9 ) 

and establish yourself in the cavern of unity, and Muhammad 
will come to you. 

Salutations, O Quail! When you hear in your spirit the 
alast of love, your body of desire replies, bale, with dis- 
pleasure. Consume your body of desire as the ass of Christ, 
then, as the Messiah, enflame yourself with the love of the 
Creator. Burn this ass and take the bird of love, so that the 
Spirit of God may happily come to you. 

Salutations, O Nightingale of the Garden of Love! Utter 
your plaintive notes caused by the wounds and pains of 
love. Lament sweetly from the heart, like David. Open 
your melodious throat and sing of spiritual things. By your 
songs show men the true Way. Make the iron of your heart 
as soft as wax, and you will be like David, ferv^ent in the love 
of God. 

Salutations, O Peacock of the Garden of the Eight Doors ! 
You have been afflicted because of the seven-headed serpent, 
through whom you were expelled from Eden. If you deliver 
yourself from this detestable serpent Adam will take you 
with him into Paradise. 

Salutations, O Excellent Pheasant! You see that which 
is far off, and you perceive the heart’s source immersed in 
the ocean of ligh^- while you remain in the pit of darkness 
and the prison of uncertainty. Lift yourself from the pit and 
raise your head to the divine throne. 

Salutations, O gently moaning Turtle-dove! You went 
out contented and returned with a sad heart to a prison as 
narrow as Jonah’s. O you who wander here and there like 
a fish, can you languish in ill-will? Cut off the head of this fish 
so that you may preen yourself on the summit of the moon. 

Salutations, O Pigeon! Intone your notes so that I may 
scatter round you seven plates of pearls. Since the collar of 
faith encircles your neck it would not become you to be 
unfaithful. When you enter into the way of understanding, 
Khizr will bring you the water of life. 

B 


(lo) 

Welcome, O Hawk! You who have taken wing, and after 
rebelling against your master have bowed your head! Bear 
yourself becomingly. You are fastened to the body of this 
world, and so are far from the other. When you are free of 
the worlds, present and future, you will rest on the hand of 
Alexander. 

Welcome, O Goldfinch! Come joyously. Be eager to act, 
and come as the fire. When you have burnt up your attach- 
ments the light of God will manifest itself more and more. 
Since your heart knows the secrets of God, remain faithful. 
When you have perfected yourself you will no longer exist. 
But God will remain. 


III. THE CONFERENCE OF THE BIRDS 



I 

THE CONFERENCE OPENS 

ALL THE BIRDS of the world, known and unknown, were 
assembled together. They said: ^No country in the world 
is without a king. How comes it, then, that the kingdom of 
the birds is without a ruler! This state of things cannot last. 
We must make effort together and search for one; for no 
country can have a good administration and a good organiza- 
tion without a king.’ 

So they began to consider how to set out on their quest. 
The Hoopoe, excited and full of hope, came forward and 
placed herself in the middle of the assembled birds. On her 
breast was the ornament which symbolized that she had 
entered the way of spiritual knowledge; the crest on her 
head was as the crown of truth, and she had knowledge of 
both good and evil. 

‘Dear Birds,’ she began, ‘I am one who is engaged in 
divine warfare, and I am a messenger of the world invisible. 
I have knowledge of God and of the secrets of creation. 
When one carries on his beak, as I do, the name of God, 
Bismillah, it follows that one must have knowledge of many 
hidden tilings. Yet my days pass restlessly and I am concerned 
with no person for I am wholly occupied by love for the 
King. I can find water by instinct, and I know many other 
secrets. I talk with Solomon and am the foremost of his 


(lO 

followers. It is astonishing that he neither asked nor sought 
for those who were absent from his kingdom, yet when I 
was away from him for a day he sent his messengers every- 
where, and, since he could not be without me for a moment, 
my worth is established for ever. I carried his letters, and I 
was his confidential companion. The bird who is sought 
after by the prophet Solomon, merits a crown for his head. 
The bird who is well spoken of by God, how can he trail his 
feathers in the dust? For years I have travelled by sea and 
land, over mountains and valleys. I covered an immense 
space in the time of the deluge; I accompanied Solomon on 
his journeys, and I have measured the bounds of the world. 

‘I know well my King, but alone I cannot set out to find 
him. Abandon your timidity, your self-conceit and your 
unbelief, for he who makes light of his own life is delivered 
from himself; he is delivered from good and evil in the way 
of his beloved. Be generous with your life. Set your feet 
upon the earth and step out joyfully for the court of the 
king. We have a true king, he lives behind the mountains 
called Kaf. His name is Simurgh and he is the king of birds. 
He is close to us, but we are far from him. The place where 
he dwells is inaccessible, and no tongue is able to utter his 
name. Before him hang a hundred thousand veils of light 
and darkness, and in the two worlds no one has power to 
dispute his kingdom. He is the sovran lord and is bathed in 
the perfection of his majesty. He does not manifest himself 
completely even in the place of his dwelling, and to this no 
knowledge or intelligence can attain. The way is unknown, 
and no one has the steadfastness to seek it, though thousands 
of creatures spend their lives in longing. Even the purest 
soul cannot describe him, neither can the reason compre- 
hend: these two eyes are blind. The wise cannot discover 
his perfection nor can the man of understanding perceive 
his beauty. All creatures have wished to attain to this perfec- 
tion and beauty by imagination. But how can you tread that 


( 13 ) 

path with thought? How measure the moon from the fish? 
So, thousands of heads go here and there, like the ball in 
polo, and only lamentations and sighs of longing are heard. 
Many lands and seas are on the way. Do not imagine that 
the journey is short; and one must have the heart of a lion 
to follow this unusual road, for it is very long and the sea 
is deep. One plods along in a state of amazement, sometimes 
smiling sometimes weeping. As for me, I shall be happy to 
discover even a trace of him. That would indeed be some- 
thing, but to live without him would be a reproach. A man 
must not keep his soul from the beloved but must be in a 
fitting state to lead his soul to the court of the King. Wash 
your hands of this life if you would be called a man of action. 
For your beloved, renounce this dear life of yours, as worthy 
men. If you submit with grace, the beloved will give his life 
for you.’ 

FIRST MANIFESTATION OF THE SIMURGH 

‘An astonishing thing! The first manifestation of the 
Simurgh took place in China in the middle of the night. 
One of his feathers fell on China and his reputation filled 
the w'orld. Ever^^one made a picture of this feather, and 
from it formed his own system of ideas, and so fell into a 
turmoil. This feather is still in the picture-gallery of that 
country; hence the saying, “ Seek knowledge, even in China 1 ” 

‘But for his manifestation there would not have been so 
much noise in the world concerning this mysterious Being. 
This sign of his existence is a token of his glory. All souls 
carry an impression of the image of his feather. Since the 
description of it has neither head nor tail, beginning nor 
end, it is not necessary to say more about it. Now, any of 
you who are for this road, prepare yourselves, and put your 
feet on the Way.’ 

When the Hoopoe had finished the birds began excitedly 
to discuss the glory of this king, and seized with longing to 


( 14 ) 

have him for their own sovereign they were all impatient to 
be off. They resolved to go together; each became a friend 
to the other and an enemy to himself. But when they began 
to realize how long and painful their journey was to be, they 
hesitated, and in spite of their apparent good-will began to 
excuse themselves, each according to his type. 



THE NIGHTINGALE 

The amorous Nightingale first came forward almost beside 
himself with passion. He poured emotion into each of the 
thousand notes of his song; and in each was to be found a 
world of secrets. When he sang of these mysteries the birds 
became silent. ‘The secrets of love are known to me,’ he 
said. ‘All night I repeat my songs of love. Is there no 
unhappy David to whom I can sing the yearning psalms of 
love? The flute’s sweet wailing is because of me, and the 
lamenting of the lute. I create a tumult among the roses as 
well as in the hearts of lovers. Always I teach new mysteries, 
at each instant I repeat new songs of sadness. When love 
overpowers my soul my singing is as the sighing sea. Who 
hears me forsakes his reason, though he be among the wise. 
If I am parted from my dear Rose I am desolate, I cease my 
singing and tell my secrets to none. Mv secrets are not 
known to everyone; only to the Rose are they known with 
certainty. So deep in love am I with the Rose that I do not 
even think of my own existence; but only of the Rose and 


( ) 

the coral of her petals. The journey to the Simurgh is beyond 
my strength; the love of the Rose is enough for the Nightin- 
gale. It is for me that she flowers with her hundred petals; 
what more then can I wish! The Rose which blooms today 
is full of longing, and for me smiles joyously. When she 
shows her face under the veil I know that it is for me. How 
then can the Nightingale remain a single night deprived of 
the love of this enchantress?’ 


3 

THE HOOPOE 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘O Nightingale, you who would stay 
behind dazzled by the exterior form of things, cease to 
delight in an attachment so deluding. The love of the Rose 
has many thorns; it has disturbed and dominated you. 
Although the Rose is fair, her beauty is soon gone. One 
who seeks self-perfection should not become the slave of a 
love so passing. If the smile of the Rose arouses your desire 
it will only fill your days and nights with lamentations. 
Forsake the Rose and blush for yourself: for she laughs at 
you with each new Spring and then she smiles no more.’ 

THE HOOPOE TELLS THE STORY OF THE 
PRINCESS AND THE DERVISH 

A king had a daughter as beautiful as the moon, who was 
loved by ever}^one. Passion was awakened by her sleepy 
eyes and by the sweet intoxication of her presence. Her face 
was white as camphor, her hair musk-black. Jealousy of her 
lips dried up a ruby of the finest water, while sugar melted 
in them for shame. 

By the will of destiny a dervdsh caught sight of her, and 
the bread he held dropped from his hand. She passed him 
like a flame, and as she passed, she laughed. At this the 


(i6) 

der\ush fell in the dust almost deprived of life. He could rest 
neither by day nor night and wept continually. When he 
thought of her smile he shed tears as a cloud drops rain. 
This frantic love went on for seven years, the while he lived 
in the street with dogs. At last her attendants resolved to 
put an end to him. But the princess spoke to him in secret 
and said: ‘How is it possible for there to be intimate rela> 
tions between you and me? Go at once, or you will be 
killed: don’t stay any longer at my door, but get up and go.’ 

The poor dervish replied: ‘The day I fell in love with you 
I washed my hands of life. Thousands such as I sacrifice 
themselves to your beauty. Since your men are bent on 
killing me unjustly, answer one simple question. On the day 
you became the cause of my death, why did you smile at 
me?’ ‘O you fool,’ she said, ‘when I saw that you were 
about to humiliate yourself, I smiled from pity. I am per- 
mitted to smile from pity but not from mockery.’ So saying, 
she vanished like a wisp of smoke, leaving the dervish 
desolate. 



4 

THE PARROT 

Then came the Parrot with sugar in her beak, dressed in a 
garment of green, and round her neck a collar of gold. The 
hawk is but a gnat beside her brilliance; earth’s green 
carpet is the reflection of her feathers, and her words are 
distilled sugar. Listen to her: ‘Vile men whose hearts are 
iron have shut me in a cage, so charming am I. Held fast 


( 17 ) 

in this prison I long for the source of the water of immor- 
tality guarded by Khizr. Like him I am clothed in green, for 
I am a Khizr among birds. I should like to go to the source 
of this water, but a moth has not strength to lift itself to the 
Simurgh's great wing ; the spring of Khizr is enough for me.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘O you who have no idea of felicity ! 
He who is not willing to renounce his life is no man. Life 
has been given to you so that for an instant you may have 
a worthy friend. Set out upon the Way, for you are not an 
almond you are only the shell. Join the company of worthy 
men and enter freely in their Way.’ 

THE FOOL OF GOD AND KHIZR 

There was a man, mad from love of God. Khizr said to 
him: ‘O perfect man, will you be my friend?’ He replied: 
‘You and I are not compatible, for you have drunk long 
draughts of the water of immortality so that you will always 
exist, and I wish to give up my life. I am without friends and 
do not know even how to support myself. Whilst you are 
busy preserving your life, I sacrifice mine every day. It is 
better that I leave you, as birds escape the snare, so, 
good-bye.’ 


5 

THE PEACOCK 

Next came the golden Peacock, with feathers of a hundred — 
what shall I say? — a hundred thousand colours! He dis- 
played himself, turning this way and that, like a bride. ‘The 
painter of the world,’ he said, ‘to fashion me took in his 
hand the brush of the Jinn. But although I am Gabriel 
among birds my lot is not to be envied. I was friendly with 
the serpent in the earthly paradise, and for this was ignomin- 
iously driven out. They deprived me of a position of trust, 
they, who trusted me, and my feet were my prison. But I 


(i8) 

am always hoping that some benevolent guide will lead me 
out of this dark abode and take me to the everlasting man- 
sions. I do not expect to reach the king you speak of, it will 
suffice me to reach his gate. How can you expect me to 
strive to reach the Simurgh since I have lived in the earthly 
paradise? I have no wish except to dwell there again. 
Nothing else has any meaning for me.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘You are straying from the true 
Way. The palace of this King is far better than your para- 
dise. You cannot do better than to strive to reach it. It is 
the habitation of the soul, it is eternity, it is the object of 
our real desires, the dwelling of the heart, the seat of truth. 
The Most High is a vast ocean; the paradise of earthly bliss 
is only a little drop; all that is not this ocean is distraction. 
When you can have the ocean why will you seek a drop of 
evening dew? Shall he who shares the secrets of the sun idle 
with a speck of dust? Is he who has all, concerned with the 
part? Is the soul concerned with members of the body? If 
you would be perfect seek the whole, choose the whole, 
be whole.’ 


THE MASTER AND THE PUPIL 

A pupil asked his Master: ‘Why was Adam obliged to leave 
paradise?’ The Master replied: ‘When Adam, the noblest of 
creatures, entered paradise he heard a resounding voice from 
the invisible world: “O you who are attached to the earthly 
paradise by a hundred bonds, know that whoever in the 
two worlds is identified with that which comes between 
him and me, I deprive of all that exists visibly, so that he 
may become attached only to me, his true friend.” To a 
lover, a hundred thousand lives are nothing without the 
beloved. He who has lived for something other than Him, 
were it Adam himself, has been driven out. The dwellers in 
Paradise know that the first thing they must give up is their 
heart.’ 


6 


THE DUCK 

Timidly the Duck came out of the water and went up to the 
assembly, dressed in his finest robe, ' No one has ever spoken 
to a creature prettier or purer than I,’ he said. ‘Every hour 
I perform the customary ablutions, and then spread upon 
the water the carpet of prayer. What bird can live and move 
in the water as I do? In this I have a marvellous power. 
Among birds I am a penitent of clear sight, of clean gar- 
ments; and I live in a pure element. Nothing is more profit- 
able to me than water, for in it I find my food and have my 
dwelling. If troubles vex me I wash them away in water. 
Clear water feeds the stream wherein I live, I love not the 
dry earth. So, since my concern is only with water, why 
should I leave it? All that lives, lives by water. How shall I 
be able to cross the valleys and fly to the Simurgh? How 
can one such as I, contented with the surface of the water, 
have any longing to see the Simurgh?’ 

The Hoopoe said: ‘O you whose delight is in the water 
which occupies your whole life! Indolently you drowse 
there — but a wave comes and you are swept away. Water 
is good only for those who have a fair countenance and a 
clean face. If you are such, it is well! But how long will you 
stay clean and pure as the water?’ 

STORY OF THE PIOUS MAN 

Someone asked a saintly fool: ‘What are the two worlds 
which always occupy our thoughts?’ He replied: ‘Both the 
upper and the lower worlds are as a drop of water, which is 


and which is not. It was a drop of water that manifested 
itself in the beginning, and then it assumed many lovely 
forms. All appearances are as water. Nothing is harder than 
iron, yet it knows that water is its origin. But all that has 
water for a basis, even iron, has no more reality than a 
dream. Water is nothing stable.’ 



THE PARTRIDGE 

The Partridge next approached, graceful yet self-satisfied. 
Shyly she rises from her treasure of pearls in her garment of 
the dawn. With blood-rimmed eyes and red beak she flies 
with lightly-turning head, carrying her belt and sword. 

She said : ‘I like to wander among ruins for I love precious 
stones. They have lighted a fire in my heart and this satisfies 
me. When I burn with desire for them the pebbles I have 
swallowed become as if tinged with blood. But often I find 
myself between stones and fire, inactive and perplexed. O my 
friends, see how I live! Is it possible to awaken one who 
sleeps on stones and swallows gravel? 

‘My heart is wounded by a hundred sorrows because my 
love for precious stones has bound me to the mountain. 
Love for other things is transitory; the kingdom of the 
jewels is eternal, they are the essence of the everlasdng 
mountain. I know the mountains and the precious stones. 
With my belt and my sword I am always seeking the 
diamond, and I have yet to discover a substance of a loftier 


nature than precious stones — even the pearl is not as beauti- 
ful. Also, the way to the Simurgh is difficult, and my feet 
are attached to the stones as if they were stuck in clay. How 
can I expect to go bravely into the presence of the mighty 
Simurgh, my hand on my head, my feet in the mud? Either 
I will die or I will discover precious stones. My nobility is 
evident, and he who does not share in my aim is not worth 
considering.’ 

The Hoopoe said: ‘O you who have colours of all the 
stones, you limp a little and give lame excuses. Your heart’s 
blood stains your claws and beak, and your search demeans 
you. What are jewels but coloured stones, yet the love of 
them hardens your heart. Without their colours they would 
be just ordinary little pebbles. He who possesses the perfume 
does not seek the colour; he who has the essence will not 
forsake it for the glitter of outward form. Seek the true 
jewel of sound quality and no longer be content with a 
stone.’ 


THE RING OF SOLOMON 

No stone was ever so renowned as the stone in the Ring of 
Solomon, yet it was quite a simple stone weighing no more 
than half a dang. But when Solomon made a seal of it, the 
whole earth came under his sway. His rule was established 
and his law extended to the far horizons. Though the wind 
carried his will to every quarter, he possessed only a stone 
of half a dang. He said : ' Since my realm and rule depend 
on this stone, from henceforth no one shall have such 
power.’ 

Although Solomon became a great king because of his 
seal, it was this that delayed his progress on the spiritual 
path; and he came to the Paradise of Eden five hundred 
years later than the other prophets. If a stone could produce 
such a state in regard to Solomon, what could it do to a being 


like you, poor Partridge? Turn your heart away from com- 
mon jewels. Seek the true jewel and be always in quest of 
the Good Jeweller. 


8 

THE HUMAY 

Now the Humay stood before the assembly, the Giver of 
Shade, whose shadow bestows pomp on kings. For this he 
has received the name of ‘Humayun’, the fortunate, since 
of all creatures he has the most ambition. He said: ‘Birds 
of land and sea, I am not a bird as you are. A high ambition 
moves me and to satisfy it I am separated from other 
creatures. I have subdued the dog of desire, therefore are 
Feridoon and Jamshid dignified. Kings are lifted up by the 
influence of my shadow, but beggarly-natured men do not 
please me. I give a bone to my dog of desire and put my 
spirit in surety against it. How can men turn their head away 
from him whose shadow creates kings? Beneath my wings 
everyone seeks shelter. Do I need the friendship of the 
lordly Simurgh when I have royalty at my disposition?’ 

The Hoopoe replied : ‘O slave of pride ! Spread no more 
your shadow and boast no more of yourself. At this moment, 
far from conferring power upon kings you are like a dog 
busy with a bone. God forbid that you put a Chosroes on 
the throne. But supposing that your shadow sets rulers on 
their thrones, tomorrow they will meet misfortune and be 
forever deprived of their royalty, while, if they had never 
seen your shadow, they would not have to face so terrible a 
reckoning on the last day.’ 

MAHMUD AND THE SAGE 

A pious man who was on the true path saw Sultan Mahmud 
in a dream and said to him: ‘O auspicious King, how are 
things in the Kingdom of Eternity?’ The Sultan replied: 


(23 ) 

‘ Strike my body if you wish but leave my soul alone. Say 
nothing, and depart, for here one does not speak of royalty. 
My power was only vanity and self-pride, conceit and error. 
Can sovereignty exalt a handful of earth ? Sovereignty belongs 
to God, the Master of the Universe. Now that I have seen 
my weaknesses and my impotence, I am ashamed of my 
royalty. If you wish to give me a title, give me that of “the 
afflicted one”. God is the King of Nature, so do not call me 
king. Empire belongs to him; and I would be happy now 
to be a simple dervish on earth. Would to God he had a 
hundred weUs to put me in so that I had not been a ruler. 
Rather would I have been a gleaner in the cornfields. Call 
Mahmud a slave. Give my blessings to my son Masud, and 
say to him : “ If you would have understanding take warning 
from your father’s state. May the wings and the feathers 
wither of that Humay which cast its shadow upon me!”’ 



THE HAWK MAKES AN EXCUSE 

Next came the Hawk, with head erect, and the bearing of a 
soldier. He said: ‘I who delight in the company of kings pay 
no regard to other creatures. I cover my eyes with a hood so 
that I may put my feet on the king’s hand. I am perfectly 
trained in polite behaviour and practise abstinence like any 
penitent so that when I am taken before a king I can perform 
my duties exactly as is expected of me. Why should I see the 


( 24 ) 

Simurgh, even in a dream? Why should I rush heedlessly to 
him? I do not feel called upon to take part in this journey. 
I am content with a morsel from the king’s hand; his court 
is good enough for me. He who plays for royal favours 
obtains his desire; and to be agreeable to the king I have only 
to take flight through the boundless valleys. I have no other 
wish than to pass my life joyfully in this fashion — either 
waiting for the king or hunting at his pleasure.’ 

REPLY OF THE HOOPOE 

The Hoopoe said : ‘O you who are attached to the outward 
form of things and have no care for essential values, the 
Simurgh is a being whose royalty becomes him, because he 
is unique in power. No true king exercises his will foolishly. 
Such a one is faithful and forgiving. Though a worldly king 
may often be just, he can also be guilty of injustice. The 
nearer one is to him, the more delicate is one’s position. 
A believer needs must offend a king, so his life is often 
in danger. Since a king is compared to a fire, keep away! 
O you who have lived near kings, take care I Listen to this : 
There was once a noble king who had a slave whose body 
was like silver. He loved him so much that he could not be 
parted from him for a moment. He gave him the most 
beautiful clothes and set him above his fellows. But the king 
sometimes amused himself with shooting arrows, and would 
place an apple on the head of his favourite and use it as a 
target. And when he loosed his arrow, the slave would go 
yellow with fear. One day, someone said to the slave: ‘‘Why 
is your face the colour of gold? You are the favourite, then 
why this mortal pallor?” He replied: “If the king were to 
hit me instead of the apple, he would say: ‘This slave is 
about the most useless thing in my court’; but when his 
arrow hits the mark everyone attributes it to his skill. As 
for me, in this painful situation, I can only hope that the 
king will continue to shoot straight!”’ 



10 


THE HERON 

The Heron came in all haste and at once began to speak 
about himself. ‘ My charming house is near the sea among 
the lagoons, where none hears my song. I am so inoffensive 
that no one complains of me. Sad and melancholy, I stand 
pensively on the salt sea’s verge, my heart filled with longing 
for the water, for if there were none what would become of 
me! But since I am not one of those who dwell in the sea, 
I am like to die, my lips parched, on its shore. Though the 
waters boil and the waves break at my feet, I cannot swallow 
a single drop; yet if the ocean should lose even a little of its 
water my heart would burn with vexation. For a creature 
such as I my passion for the sea is enough. I have not the 
strength to go in quest of the Simurgh, so I ask to be 
excused. How could one like me, who seeks only a drop of 
water, possibly attain union with the Simurgh?’ 

Said the Hoopoe: ‘O ignorant of the sea, don’t you know 
that it is full of crocodiles and other dangerous creatures? 
Sometimes its water is bitter, sometimes salt; sometimes it is 
calm, sometimes boisterous; always changing, never stable; 
sometimes it flows, sometimes it ebbs. Many great ones have 
been swallowed up in its abyss. The diver in its depths holds 
his breath lest he should be thrown up like a straw. The sea 
is an element devoid of loyalty. Do not trust it or it will end 
by submerging you. It is resdess because of its love for its 
friend. Sometimes it rolls great billows, sometimes it roars. 
Since the sea cannot find what it desires, how will you find 
c 


(26) 

there a resting place for your heart ! The ocean is a rill which 
rises in the way that leads to its friend; why then should you 
remain here content, and not strive to see the face of the 
Simurgh?’ 

THE SAGE AND THE OCEAN 

A sage, whose habit it was to ponder over the meaning of 
things, went to Ocean and asked why it wore a garment of 
blue, since this was the colour of mourning, and why did it 
boil without fire? 

Ocean replied to the man of contemplation : ^ I am troubled 
because I am separated from my friend. Because of my in- 
sufficiency I am not worthy of him, so I put on a garment of 
blue as a sign of the remorse I feel. In my distress the beaches 
of my lips are dried up, and because of the fire of my love I 
am in a turmoil. Could I find but a single drop of the celestial 
water of Kausar, I should be in possession of the gate of 
eternal life. Lacking this drop I shall die from desire with 
the thousand others who perish on the way.’ 



II 

THE OWL 

The Owl came forv'ard with a bewildered air and said: ‘I 
have chosen for my dwelling a ruined and tumbledown 
house. I was born among the ruins and there I take my 
delight — but not in drinking wine. I know hundreds of 
habited places, but some are in a state of confusion and 
others in a state of hatred. He who wishes to live in peace 


(^ 7 ) 

must go to the ruins, as the madmen do. If I mope among 
them it is because of hidden treasure. The love of treasure 
draws me there, for it is to be found among the ruins. Also, 
I can conceal my anxious quest, and hope to find a treasure 
that is not protected by a talisman; if my foot should light 
on one, my heart’s desire will be achieved. I well believe 
that love toward the Simurgh is not a fable, for it is not 
experienced by the heedless; but I am feeble, and am far 
from being firm in his love, since I love only my treasure 
and my ruins.’ 

The Hoopoe said to him: ‘O you who are drunk with 
love of riches, suppose you do find a treasure ! Ah well, you 
will die on this treasure, and life will have slipped away 
without your having attained the high aim of which at least 
you are aware. Love of gold is a characteristic of infidels. 
He who makes an idol of gold is another Thare. Will you 
not, perhaps, become as one of the Samiri of the Israelites 
who made the golden calf ? Don’t you know that everyone 
who has been corrupted by the love of gold will on the day 
of resurrection have his face changed, like a false coin, to 
the likeness of a mouse?’ 


THE MISER 

A sot hid a coffer of gold, and soon after, died. A year later 
the son saw his father in a dream, in the form of a mouse, 
its two eyes full of tears. It was running backwards and 
forwards on the place where the gold was hidden. His son 
asked him: ‘What are you doing here?’ The father replied: 
‘I hid some gold and have come to see if anyone has dis- 
covered it.’ ‘Why do you have the form of a mouse?’ asked 
the son. The father said: ‘ The soul of the man who has given 
up everything for the love of money assumes this form. Take 
note of me, O my son, and profit by what you see. Renounce 
the love of gold!’ 


12 


THE SPARROW 

Then came the Sparrow, of feeble body and tender heart, 
trembling like a flame from head to foot. She said: ‘I am 
dumbfounded and crestfallen. I don’t know how to exist, 
and I am frail as a hair. I have no one to help me and I have 
not the strength of an ant. I have neither down nor feathers 
— nothing. How can a weakling like me make her way to 
the Simurgh? A sparrow could never do it. There is no lack 
of those in the world who seek this union, but for a being 
such as I it is not becoming. I do not wish to begin such a 
toilsome journey for something I can never reach. If I should 
start out for the court of the Simurgh I should be con- 
sumed on the way. So since I am not at all fitted for this 
enterprise I shall be content to seek here my Joseph in the 
well. If I find him and draw him out I shall soar with him 
from the fish to the moon.’ 

The Hoopoe replied : ‘O you, who in your despondency 
are sometimes sad, sometimes gay, I am not deceived by 
these artful pleas. You are a little hypocrite. Even in your 
humility you show a hundred signs of vanity and pride. Not 
another word, sew up your lips and put your foot forward. 
If you bum, you will burn with the others. And don’t com- 
pare yourself with Joseph!’ 

STORY OF JACOB 

When Joseph was taken, his father Jacob lost his sight 
because of the tears of blood that flowed from his eyes. The 
name of Joseph was always on his lips. At last the Angel 
Gabriel went to him and said : ‘ If ever again you utter the 


(^ 9 ) 

word ‘‘Joseph’’ I will strike your name from the roll of 
prophets and messengers.’ When Jacob received this 
message from God the name of Joseph was lifted from his 
tongue, but he did not cease to repeat it in his heart. One 
night he saw Joseph in a dream, and would have called to 
him, but remembering God’s command, he beat his breast and 
heaved a sad sigh from his immaculate heart. Then Gabriel 
came : ‘ God says that although you have not pronounced the 
name “Joseph” with your tongue, you have heaved a sigh, 
and thus destroyed all the effect of your repentance.’ 

13 

DISCUSSION BETWEEN THE HOOPOE AND 
THE BIRDS 

Then all the birds, one after another, began to make foolish 
excuses. If I do not repeat them, pardon me, reader, for it 
would take too long. But how can such birds hope to 
entangle the Simurgh in their claws? So the Hoopoe con- 
tinued her discourse: 

‘He who prefers the Simurgh to his own life must struggle 
bravely with himself. If your gizzard will not digest a single 
grain how shall you share in the feasting of the Simurgh? 
When you hesitate over a sip of wine how will you drink a 
large cup, O paladin? If you have not the energy for an atom 
how shall you find the treasure of the sun? If you can drown 
in a drop of water, how will you go from the depths of the 
sea to the heavenly heights? This is not a simple perfume; 
and neither is it a task for him who has not a clean face,’ 
When the birds had thought this over they again spoke to 
the Hoopoe: ‘You have taken upon yourself the task of 
showing us the way, you, the best and most powerful of 
birds. But we are feeble, with neither down nor feathers, so 
how shall we be able at last to reach the Sublime Simurgh? 
If we should arrive it would be a miracle. Tell us something 


(3o) 

about this marvellous Being by means of a similitude, or, 
blind as we are, we shall understand nothing of the myster}\ 
If there were some relation between this Being and ourselves 
it would be much easier for us to set out. But, as we see it, 
he may be compared to Solomon, and we to begging ants. 
How can an insect in the bottom of a pit mount up to the 
great Simurgh? Shall royalty be the portion of the beggar?’ 

REPLY OF THE HOOPOE 

The Hoopoe said: ‘O birds without aspiration! How shall 
love spring bountifully in a heart devoid of sensibility? 
Begging the question like this, which seems to gratify you, 
will result in nothing. He who loves sets out with open eyes 
towards his goal making a plaything of his life. 

"When the Simurgh manifested himself outside the veil, 
radiant as the sun, he produced thousands of shadows on 
earth. When he cast his glance on these shadows there 
appeared birds in great numbers. The different types of 
birds that are seen in the world are thus only the shadow of 
the Simurgh. Know then, O ignorant ones, that when you 
understand this you will understand exactly your relation to 
the Simurgh. Ponder over this mystery, but do not reveal it. 
He who acquires this knowledge sinks into the immensity 
of the Simurgh; though he must not think that he is God 
on that account. 

"If you become this of which I speak you will not be God, 
but you will be immersed in God. Does a man thus im- 
mersed become transubstantiated? When you understand 
of whom you are the shadow you will become indifferent to 
life or death. If the Simurgh had not wished to manifest him- 
self he would not have cast his shadow; if he had wished to 
remain hidden his shadow would not have appeared in the 
world. All that which is produced by his shadow becomes 
visible. If your spirit is not fit to see the Simurgh, neither 
will your heart be a bright mirror, fit to reflect him. It is true 


(30 

that no eye is able to contemplate and marvel at his beauty, 
nor is it capable of understanding ; one cannot feel towards 
the Simurgh as one feels towards the beauty of this world. 
But by his abounding grace he has given us a mirror to re- 
flect himself, and this mirror is the heart. Look into your 
heart and there you will see his image.’ 

THE CHARMING KING 

There was once a king of incomparable charm and beauty. 
The dawn was a flash of lightning from his countenance, the 
Angel Gabriel an emanation of his fragrance and the king- 
dom of beauty was the Koran of his secrets. The whole world 
resounded with his fame, and his love was felt by every 
creature. When he rode through the city he covered his face 
with a crimson veil; but those who looked even at the veil 
lost their heads, and those who uttered his name at once cut 
out their tongues. Thousands died for love of him; others 
gave their lives believing it better to die at once than to live 
a hundred long lives away from him. An astonishing thing ! 
They could neither endure his presence for long nor could 
they exist without him. However, to those who could endure 
it he showed himself ; those who could not had to be content 
to hear his voice. In consequence, the king ordered a mirror 
to be made so that his face could be seen indirectly. The 
mirror was put up in his palace, and he went and looked in 
it, so that all could see his reflection. 

So it is with you. If you cherish the beauty of your friend, 
understand that your heart is the mirror, see in it your king 
in the mansion of his glory. All appearances are nothing but 
the mysterious shadow of the Simurgh. If he had revealed his 
beauty to you, you would have recognized it in his shadow. 
Whether there were thirty birds, ‘Si-murgh’, or forty, you 
would only see his shadow. The Simurgh is not distinct from 
his shadow, to hold the contrary is to err; the one and the 
other exist together. Seek reunion ; or better, leave the shadow 


(30 

and you will discover the Secret. With good fortune you will 
see the Sun in the shadow; but if you lose yourself in the 
shadow, how will you achieve union with the Simurgh? 

MAHMUD AND AYAZ 

Aylz was afflicted with the evil eye, and had to leave the 
court of the Sultan Mahmud. In despair he fell into a state 
of despondency and lay on his bed and wept. When Mahmud 
heard about it he said to one of his attendants: ‘Go to Ayaz 
and say, “I know that you are sad, but I also am in the 
same state. Though my body is far from you my spirit is 
near. O you who love me, I am not absent from you for a 
moment. The evil eye has indeed done ill in afflicting one so 
charming.^’ ’ He added to his attendant: ‘Go at once, go like 
fire, go as the rushing water, go as the lightning before the 
thunder!’ 

The attendant set off like the wind and in no time reached 
Ayaz. But he found the Sultan already there, sitting before 
his slave. And trembling, he said to himself: ‘What a mis- 
fortune to have to serve a king; no doubt my blood will be 
shed today.’ Then he said to the Sultan: ‘I assure you that I 
haven’t stopped for a moment, sitting or standing; how then 
has the King got here before me? Does the King believe me? 
If I have been negligent in any way I acknowledge my fault.’ 

‘You are not Mahram,’ said Mahmud, ‘how then should 
you be able to travel as I have? I came by a secret way. 
When I asked for news of Ayaz my spirit was already with 
him.’ 


14 

THE HOOPOE TELLS THEM ABOUT THE PROPOSED 
JOURNEY 

When she had finished her discourse the birds began to 
understand something of the ancient mysteries, and the 
relation between themselves and the Simurgh. But though 


(33 ) 

they were seized with a desire to make the journey they 
flinched from setting out, for doubts still disturbed their 
minds, so they said to the Hoopoe : ‘ Do you wish us to give 
up our tranquil lives at once? We feeble birds by ourselves 
cannot expect to find the way to that sublime abode where 
the Simurgh has his being.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: H speak to you as your guide. He 
who loves does not think about his own life; to love truly 
a man must forget about himself, be he ascetic or libertine. 
If your desires do not accord with your spirit, sacrifice them, 
and you will come to the end of your journey. If the body of 
desire obstructs the way, reject it; then fix your eyes in front 
and contemplate. An ignorant person will ask, ‘‘What con- 
nection is there between belief or unbelief, and love?” But 
I say, “Do lovers regard their lives? The lover sets fire to 
all hope of harvest, he puts the blade to his neck, he pierces 
his body. With love comes sorrow and the heart’s blood. 
Love loves the diflScult things.” 

‘O Cup-bearer! Fill my cup with the blood of my heart 
and if there be no more, give me the lees. Love is a cruel 
pain that devours every^thing. Sometimes it tears the veil 
from the soul, sometimes it draws it together. An atom of 
love is preferable to all that exists between the horizons, an 
atom of its pain better than the happy love of all lovers. 
Love is the 'very marrow of beings ; but there can be no real 
love without real suffering. Whoever is grounded firm in 
love renounces faith, religion, and unbelief. Love will open 
the door of spiritual poverty and poverty will show you the 
way of unbelief. When there remains neither unbelief nor 
religion, your body and your soul will disappear; you will 
then be worthy of the mysteries — if you would fathom them, 
this is the only way. 

‘Go forward then, without fear. Forsake childish things 
and, above all, take courage; for a hundred vicissitudes will 
come upon you unawares.’ 


( 34 ) 

STORY OF SHAIKH SAN’aN 

The Shaikh San’an was a saintly man in his day, and had 
perfected himself to a high degree. For fifty years he had 
remained in his retreat with four hundred disciples, who 
worked on themselves day and night. He had great know- 
Ir-dge, and benefited by outer and inner revelation. Much 
of his life had been spent in making pilgrimages to Mecca. 
His prayers and fasts were without number and he omitted 
none of the practices of the Sunnites. He could work 
miracles, and his breath healed the sick and depressed. 

One night he dreamed that he went from Mecca to Greece 
and there worshipped an idol; and waking grief-stricken 
from this oppressive dream he said to his disciples: ‘I must 
set out at once for Greece to see if I can discover the meaning 
of this dream.’ 

With his four hundred disciples he left the Ka’aba and in 
time arrived in Greece. They travelled from end to end of 
that country, and one day by chance came to where a young 
girl was sitting on a balcony. This girl was a Christian, and 
the expression of her face showed that she possessed the 
faculty of pondering on the things of God. Her beauty was 
like the sun in splendour, and her dignity as the Signs of the 
Zodiac. From jealousy of her radiance the morning star 
loitered above her house. Who caught his heart in her hair 
put on the belt of a Christian; whose desire lighted on the 
ruby of her lips lost his head. The morn took on a darker 
tint because of her black hair, the land of Greece wrinkled 
up because of the beauty of her freckles. Her two eyes were 
a lure for lovers; her arched brows formed tender sickles 
over twin moons. When power lighted the pupils of her 
eyes a hundred hearts became her prey. Her face sparkled 
like a living flame, and the moist rubies of her lips could 
make a whole world thirst. Her languorous lashes were a 
hundred daggers, and her mouth was so small that even 
words could not pass. Her waist, slender as a hair, was 


( 35 ) 

squeezed through her zunnar; and the silver dimple of her 
chin was as vivifying as the discourses of Jesus. 

When she lifted a corner of her veil the heart of the 
shaikh took fire; and a single hair bound his loins with a 
hundred zunnars. He could not take his eyes from this 
young Christian, and such was his love that his will slipped 
from his hands. Unbelief from her hair strewed itself on his 
faith. He cried out: "Oh, how terrible is this love that I have 
for her. When religion leaves you, of what good is the 
heart!’ 

When his companions understood what had happened, 
and saw the state he was in, they held their heads in their 
hands. Some began to reason with him, but he refused to 
listen. He could only stand day and night, his eyes fixed on 
the balcony and his mouth open. The stars that glowed like 
lamps borrowed heat from this holy man whose heart was 
on fire. His love grew until he was beside himself. "O 
Lord,’ he prayed, ‘in my life I have fasted and suffered, but 
never have I suffered like this; I am in torment. The night is 
as long and as black as her hair. Where is the lamp of 
Heaven? Have my sighs extinguished it or has it hidden 
itself from jealousy? Where is my good fortune? Why does 
it not help me to get the love of this girl? Where is my 
reason to make use of my knowledge? Where is my hand to 
put dust on my head? Where is my foot to walk to my 
beloved, and my eye to see her face? Where is my beloved to 
give me her heart? What is this love, this grief, this pain?’ 

The friends of the shaikh came again to him. One said: 
‘O worthy shaikh, lift yourself up and drive away this 
temptation. Take hold of yourself and perform the ordained 
ablutions.’ He replied: ‘Do you not know that this night I 
have made a hundred ablutions, and with my heart’s blood?’ 
Another said: ‘Where is your chaplet? How can you pray 
without it?’ He replied: ‘I have thrown away my chaplet so 
that I may girdle myself with a Christian zunnar.’ Another 


( 56 ) 

said : ‘O saintly old man, if you have sinned repent without 
delay.’ ‘I repent now,’ he replied, ‘of having followed the 
true law, and I only wish to give up that absurdity.’ Another 
said: ‘Leave this place and go and worship God.’ He 
replied: ‘If my idol were here it would become me to bow 
down before her.’ Another said: ‘Then, you will not even 
try to repent! Are you no longer a follower of Islam?’ The 
shaikh replied: ‘No one repents more than I that I was not 
in love until now.’ Another said: ‘The infernal regions are 
waiting for you if you continue on this path; but watch 
yourself, and you will avoid them.' He replied: ‘If heU is 
there it is only from my sighs, which would feed seven hells.’ 

Seeing that their words produced no effect on the shaikh, 
although they pleaded with him all night, his friends went 
away. Meanwhile the Turk of the Morning, with sabre and 
golden buckler, cut off the head of Black Night, so that the 
world of illusion was bathed in the radiance of the Sun. 
The shaikh, plaything of his love, wandered with the dogs, 
and for a month sat in the street hoping to see her face. The 
dust was his bed and her doorstep his pillow. 

Then the beautiful Christian, seeing that he was hopelessly 
in love, veiled herself, and went out and said to him: 
‘O shaikh, how is it that you, an ascetic, are so drunk with 
the wine of polytheism, and sit in a Christian street in such 
a state? If you adore me like this you will go mad.’ The 
shaikh replied: ‘It is because you have stolen my heart. 
Either give it back or accept my love. If you wish I will lay 
down my life for you, but you may restore that life by a 
touch of your lips. Because of you my heart is on fire. I have 
shed tears like rain and my eyes have lost their sight. Where 
my heart was there is only blood. If I were united to you my 
life would be restored. You are the sun, I the shadow. I am 
a lost man, but if you will incline to me I will take under my 
wing the seven cupolas of the world. Do not leave me, I 
implore you 1 ’ 


( 37 ) 

‘O you old driveller!’ she said, ‘aren’t you ashamed to 
use camphor for your winding sheet? You should blush for 
suggesting intimacy with me with your cold breath! You 
had better wrap yourself in a shroud than spend your time 
on me. You cannot inspire love. Go away!’ 

The shaikh replied : ‘ Say what you will, I still love you. 
What does it matter whether one is young or old, love 
affects all hearts.’ 

She said: ‘Very well, if you are not to be denied, listen to 
me. You must wash your hands of Islam; for love which is 
not identified with its beloved is only colour and perfume.’ 

He said: ‘I will do all that you wish. I will undertake all 
that you command, you, whose body is like silver. I am 
your slave. Put a lock of your hair on my neck to remind 
me of my slavery.’ 

‘If you are a man of action,’ said the young Christian, ‘you 
must do four things : prostrate yourself before the idols, burn 
the Koran, drink wine, and shut your eyes to your religion.’ 

He said : ‘ I will drink wine to your beauty but the other 
three things I cannot do,’ ‘Very well,’ she said, ‘come and 
drink wine with me, then you will soon accept the other 
conditions.’ 

She led him to a temple of magicians, where he saw a 
very strange gathering. They sat down to a banquet at which 
the hostess was distinguished by her beauty. His beloved 
handed him a cup of wine, and when he took it and looked 
at the smiling rubies of her lips, like two lids of a casket, 
the fire blazed in his heart and a stream of blood rushed to 
his eyes. He tried to recall the sacred books he had read and 
written on religion, and the Koran that he knew so well; 
but when the wine passed from the cup into his stomach he 
forgot them all; his spiritual knowledge was washed away. 
He lost his free will and let slip his heart from his hand. 
When he tried to put his hand on her neck, she said: ‘You 
only pretend to love. You do not understand the mystery 


( 38 ) 

of love. If you are sure of your love you may find the way 
to my curled locks. Lose yourself in unbelief by the way 
of my tangled ringlets; follow the locks of my hair, and you 
may put your hand on my neck. But if you do not wish to 
follow my way, get up and go; and take the cloak and staff 
of a faquir.’ 

At this, the amorous shaikh was crestfallen; and now he 
yielded without more ado to his destiny. The wine he had 
drunk made his head as uncertain as a compass. The wine 
was old and his love was young. How could he have been 
otherwise than drunk and in love? 

'O Splendour of the Moon,’ he said, ‘tell me what you 
wish. If I was not an idolater before I lost my wits, now that 
I am drunk I will burn the Koran before the idol.’ 

The young beauty said: ‘You are now really my man. 
You are worthy of me. Till now you were uncooked in love, 
but having acquired experience you are roasted. Good!’ 

When the Christians heard that the shaikh had embraced 
their faith they carried him, still drunk, into the church and 
told him to girdle himself with a zunnar. He did this and 
threw his dervdsh mantle into the fire, forsook the Faith, 
and delivered himself up to the practices of the Christian 
religion. 

He said to the girl: ‘O charming lady, no one has ever 
done as much for a woman as I have done. I have wor- 
shipped your idols, I have drunk wine, and I have given 
up the true Faith. All this I have done for love of you, and 
that I may have you.’ 

Again she said to him: ‘Old driveller, slave of love, how 
can a woman such as I be united to a faquir? I need silver 
and gold, and since y^ou have none, take your head and go.’ 

The shaikh said: ‘O lovely woman, your body is a cypress 
and your breasts are silver. If you repulse me you will drive 
me to despair. The thought of possessing you has thrown 
me into a turmoil. On account of you my friends have 


( 39) 

become my enemies. As you are, so are they; what shall I 
do? O my beloved, I had rather be in hell with you than in 
paradise without you.’ 

At last she relented, and the shaikh became her man, and 
she too began to feel the flame of love. But to try him further 
she said: ‘Now, for my dowry, O imperfect man, go and 
look after my herd of pigs for the space of a year, and then 
we shall pass our lives together in joy or sadness!’ Without 
a protest, this shaikh of the Ka’aba, this saint, resigned him- 
self to becoming a hog-ward. 

In the nature of each of us there are a hundred pigs. O you, 
who are non-entities, you are thinking only of the danger 
that the shaikh was in 1 The danger is to be found in each one 
of us, and it raises its head from the moment we start out on 
the path of self-knowledge. If you do not know your own 
pigs then you do not know the Path. But if you do set out 
you will meet a thousand pigs — a thousand idols. Drive 
away these pigs, burn these idols on the plain of love; or 
else be like the shaikh, dishonoured by love. 

Well, then, when the news spread that the shaikh had 
become a Christian, his companions were in great distress 
and all but one went away, who said to him: ‘Tell us the 
secret of this matter so that we may become Christians with 
you. We do not wish you to remain an apostate alone, so 
we will take the Christian zunnar. If you do not agree we 
shall return to the Ka’aba and spend our time in prayer in 
order not to see that which we* see now.’ 

The shaikh said: ‘My soul is full of sadness. Go where 
your wishes carry you. As for me, the church is my place, 
and the young Christian my destiny. Do you know why you 
are free? It is because you are not in my position. If you 
were, I should have a companion in my unhappy love. Re- 
turn then, dear friend, to the Ka’aba, for no one can share 
my present state. If they should ask about me say: “His 
eyes are full of blood, his mouth full of poison; he remains 


( 4 °) 

in the jaws of the dragons of violence. No infidel wQuld 
consent to do what this proud Musulman has done by the 
effect of destiny. A young Christian has caught his neck in 
a noose of her hair.” If they reproach me, say that many fall 
by the way on this road which has neither beginning nor 
end, but some by chknce will be safe from descent and 
danger.’ With this he turned his face from his friend and 
went back to the herd. 

His followers, who had been watching from a distance, 
wept bitterly. Finally, they journeyed back to the Ka’aba, 
and ashamed and bewildered hid themselves in a corner. 

Now in the Ka’aba there was a friend of the shaikh who 
was a seer, and who was on the true path. No one knew the 
shaikh better than he, though he had not accompanied him 
to Greece. When this man asked for news the disciples 
related all that had happened to the shaikh, and they asked 
what ugly branch of a tree had pierced his breast, and 
whether this had happened by the will of fate. They said 
that a young infidel had bound him with a single hair and 
barred him from the hundred ways of Islam. "He dallies with 
her ringlets and freckles, and has burnt his khirka. He has 
forsaken his religion and now girdled with a zunnar he looks 
after a herd of pigs. But though he has staked his very soul 
we feel there is still hope.’ 

Hearing this, the disciple’s face turned the colour of gold, 
and he began to lament bitterly. Then he said: ‘Companions 
in misfortune, in religion there is neither man nor woman. 
When an unfortunate friend needs help it sometimes happens 
that only a single person in a thousand can be of use.’ He 
then reproached them for leaving the shaikh and said that 
they should even have become Christians for his sake. He 
added: ‘A friend must remain a friend. It is in misfortune 
that you discover on whom you can rely; for in good 
fortune you will have a thousand friends. Now that the 
shaikh has fallen into the crocodile’s jaws everyone stays 


(41 ) 

away from him in order to keep their reputation. If you shun 
him because of this strange happening you will have been 
tried and found wanting.’ 

‘We offered to stay with him/ they said, ‘and even agreed 
to become idolaters. But he is an experienced and learned 
man, and we trust him, so when he told us to go, we 
returned here.’ 

The faithful disciple replied: ‘If you really wish to act 
you must knock on the door of God; then, by prayer, you 
will be admitted to his presence. You should have been 
pleading with God for your shaikh, each reciting a different 
prayer; and God, seeing your bewildered state, would have 
given him back to you. Why have you refrained from knock- 
ing at the door of God?’ 

At this they were ashamed to raise their heads. But he 
said: ‘This is no time for regrets. Let us go now to the 
court of God. Let us lie in the dust, and cover ourselves with 
the garment of supplication that we may recover our leader! ’ 

The disciples at once set out for Greece, and having 
arrived there remained near the shaikh. For forty days and 
forty nights they prayed. During these forty days and forty 
nights they neither ate nor slept; they tasted neither bread 
nor water. At last the power of the prayers of these sincere 
men made itself felt in Heaven. Angels and archangels and 
all the Saints robed in green oii the heights and in the 
valleys, now arrayed themselves in the garments of mourn- 
ing. The arrow of prayer had reached its mark. When morn- 
ing came, a musk-laden zephyr blew softly upon the faithful 
disciple at prayer in his cell, and the world was unveiled to 
his spirit. He saw the Prophet Muhammad approaching, 
radiant as the morn, two locks of hair falling upon his breast; 
the shadow of God was the sun of his countenance, the desire 
of a hundred worlds was attached to each of his hairs. His 
gracious smile drew all men to him. The disciple rose up and 
said: ‘O messenger of God, the guide of all creatures, help 

D 


( 42 ) 

me! Our shaikh has strayed. Show him the way, I implore 
you in the name of the Most High I ’ 

Muhammad said: ‘O you who see things with the inner 
eye, because of your efforts your pure desires shall be 
gratified. Between the shaikh and God there has been for 
a long time a black speck; but I have poured out the dew 
of supplication and have scattered it on the dust of his exis- 
tence. He has repented and his sin is wiped away. The faults 
of a hundred worlds can disappear in the vapour of a 
moment of repentance. When the ocean of good-will is 
moved its waves wash out the sins of men and women.’ 

The disciple uttered a cry that moved all heaven. He ran 
and told his companions the good news, then weeping for 
joy hastened to where the shaikh was keeping the pigs. But 
the shaikh was as a fire, as one illumined. He had cast off the 
Christian belt, thrown away the girdle, torn the bonnet of 
drunkenness from his head and renounced Christianity. 
He saw himself as he was and shedding tears of remorse 
lifted his hands to heaven; all that he had forsaken — the 
Koran, the mysteries and prophecies, came back to him, 
and he was delivered from his misery and folly. They said to 
him: ‘Now is the hour of gratitude and thankfulness. The 
Prophet has interceded for you. Thanks be to God that he 
has lifted you out of an ocean of pitch and placed your foot 
on the way of the Sun.’ 

The shaikh thereupon resumed his khirka, performed his 
ablutions, and set out for the Hejaz. 

While this was happening the Christian girl saw in a 
dream the sun descending to her, and heard these words: 
‘Follow your shaikh, embrace his faith, be his dust. You 
who are soiled, be pure as he is now. You led him in your 
way, enter now in his.’ 

She woke; a light broke on her spirit, and she longed to 
set out on her quest. Her hand seized her heart, and her 
heart fell from her hand. But when she realized that she was 


( 45 ) 

alone, and had no idea of the way, her joy was changed to 
weeping and she ran out to throw dust on her head. Then 
she started out in pursuit of the shaikh and his disciples; but 
growing wear}^ and distraught, covered with sweat, she 
threw herself on the ground and cried out: ‘May God the 
Creator forgive me! I am a woman, disgusted with life. Do 
not strike me down, for I struck you in ignorance and 
through ignorance committed many faults. Forget the ill I 
have done. I accept the true Faith.’ 

An inner voice apprised the shaikh of this. He 'stopped, 
and said: ‘That young girl is no longer an infidel. Light has 
come to her and she has entered our Way. Let us go back. 
One can now be intimately bound to one’s idol without sin.’ 

But his companions said: ‘Now what is the use of all 
your repentance and remorse! Are you going back to your 
love?’ He told them of the voice he had heard, and reminded 
them that he had renounced his former ways. So they went 
back until they came to where the girl lay. Her face had 
gone the colour of yellow gold, her feet were bare, her dress 
torn. As the shaikh bent down to her she swooned away. 
When she came to herself her tears fell like dew from roses, 
and she said: ‘I am consumed with shame because of you. 
Lift the veil of the secret and instruct me in Islam so that I 
may walk in the Way.’ 

When this fair idol was at last numbered among the faith- 
ful, the companions shed tears of joy. But her heart was 
impatient to be delivered from sorrow. ‘O shaikh,’ she said, 
‘my strength is gone. I wish to leave this dusty deafening 
world. Farewell, Shaikh San’an. I confess my faults. 
Pardon me, and let me go.’ 

So this moon of beauty who had had no more than half 
a life, shook it from her hand. The sun hid itself behind the 
clouds while her sweet soul separated itself from her body. 
She, a drop in the ocean of illusion, had returned to the true 
ocean. 


( 44 ) 

We all leave as the wind; she is gone and we also shall 
go. Such things often happen in the way of love. There is 
despair and mercy, illusion and security. Though the body 
of desire cannot understand the secrets, adversity cannot 
knock away the polo ball of good fortune. One must hear 
with the ear of the mind and the heart, not with that of the 
body. The struggle of the spirit with the body of desire is 
unending. Lament! For there is cause to mourn. 


15 

THE BIRDS Discuss THE PROPOSED JOURNEY 
TO THE SIMURGH 

When they had pondered over the story of Shaikh San’an, 
the birds decided to give up all their former way of life. The 
thought of the Simurgh lifted them out of their apathy; love 
for him alone filled their hearts, and they began to consider 
how to Start on the journey. They said: ‘First, we must have 
a guide to tie and untie the knots. We need a leader who will 
tell us what to do, one who can save us from this deep sea. 
We will obey him from our hearts and do what he says, be 
it pleasant or unpleasant, so that our ball will fall on the 
mallet of the Caucasus. Then the atom will be united to the 
majestic sun; and the shadow of the Simurgh will fall on us. 
Now, let us draw lots for a leader. He on whom the lot falls 
shall be our guide; he shall be great among the small.’ 

Then began a commotion, everyone talking at once, but 
when everything was ready, the twittering and chattering 
died down and the birds fell silent. The drawing was con- 
ducted with due ceremony, and eventually the lot fell on 
the spirited Hoopoe. All with one accord agreed and pro- 
mised to obey her even at the risk of their lives, and to spare 
neither soul nor body. The Hoopoe came forward and a 
crown was placed on her head. 


(45 ) 

At the setting-out place, so great was the number of birds 
who flocked there that they hid the moon and the fish; but 
when they saw the entrance to the first valley, they flew up 
to the clouds in fright. Then, with much fluttering of wings 
and feathers and mutual encouragement, their eagerness to 
renounce ever}"thing revived. But the task before them was 
heavy and the way was long. Silence brooded over the road 
which stretched before them and a bird asked the Hoopoe 
why it was so deserted. ‘Because of the awe that the King 
inspires, to whose dwelling it leads" she answered. 

ANECDOTE OF BAYAZID BISTAMI 

One night when the Shaikh Bayazid went out from the town 
he noticed that a profound silence lay over the plain. The 
moon lighted the world making the night as bright as day. 
The stars clustered according to their sympathies, and each 
constellation had its special function. The shaikh walked on 
without seeing any movement or a single soul. His heart 
was stirred and he said: ‘Lord, a piercing sadness moves me. 
Why is it that a court so sublime is without eager wor- 
shippers?" ‘Be not amazed," an inner voice answered, ‘the 
King does not admit ever^^one to his court. His dignity does 
not suffer him to receive tramps at his door. When the sanc- 
tuary of our splendour sheds its effulgence it disdains the 
sleepy and the heedless. You are one of a thousand who 
crave admission and you must wait patiently." 


l6 

THE BIRDS SET OUT 

Fear and apprehension drew plaintive cries from the birds 
as they faced a road without end, where the strong wind of 
detachment from earthly things split the vault of heaven. In 
their anxiety they crowded together and asked the Hoopoe 


( 46 ) 

for advice. They said: ‘We do not know how we should 
present ourselves to the King with due reverence. But you 
have been in the presence of Solomon, and know the usages 
of etiquette. Also you have ascended and descended this 
road, and many times flown round the earth. You are our 
Imam, to bind and to loose. We ask you now to go up into 
the minabar and instruct us. Tell us about the road and 
about the King’s court and the ceremonies there, for we do 
not wish to behave foolishly. Also, all kinds of difficulties 
arise in our minds, and for this journey one needs to be free 
from disquiet. We have many questions to ask, and we wish 
you to resolve our misgivings, otherwise we shall not see 
clearly on this long road.’ 

The Hoopoe then set the crown on her head, sat on her 
throne and disposed herself to speak to them. When the 
army of birds was ranged in front of her in ranks, the 
Nightingale and the Turtle-dove went up and as two readers 
with the same voice together gave forth a melody so sweet 
that all who heard were lifted out of themselves. Then one 
after another, a number of birds went up to her to speak 
about their difficulties and to make excuses. 


17 

SPEECH OF THE FIRST BIRD 

The first bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O you who have been 
made our leader, tell us what makes you stand out from us. 
Since you seem to be as us, and we as you, in what lies the 
difference? What sins of the body or of the soul have we 
committed that we are ignorant while you have under- 
standing?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘Know, O bird, that Solomon once 
saw me by chance; and that my good fortune was not the 
result of gold or silver, but of this lucky meeting. How can 


( 47 ) 

a creature profit from obedience alone? Iblis himself obeys. 
Nevertheless, if anyone counsels the rejection of obedience 
then malediction shall be on him for ever. Practise obedience 
and you will win a glance from the true Solomon.’ 


MAHMUD AND THE FISHERMAN 

Sultan Mahmud was once separated from his army, and all 
alone galloped away like the wind. By and by he saw a 
small boy sitting on the bank of a river into which he had 
cast his net. The Sultan went up to him and noticing that 
he was dejected and depressed said: ‘Dear child, what makes 
you so sad? Never have I seen anyone so cast down.’ ‘O 
Illustrious Prince,’ he replied, ‘there are seven of us; we 
have no father, and our mother is very poor. Each day I 
come and try to catch fish for supper. Only when I succeed 
in landing some do we have an evening meal.’ 

‘Would you like me to have a try?’ asked the Sultan. The 
boy consenting, the Sultan cast the net, which, sharing in 
his good fortune quickly took a hundred fish. At this, the 
boy said to himself^, ‘My fortune is astonishing. What luck 
that all these fish have tumbled into my net.’ But the Sultan 
said: ‘Don’t deceive yourself, my child, I am the cause of 
your good luck. The Sultan has caught these fish for you.’ 
So saying, he mounted his horse. The boy asked him to 
take his share, but the Sultan refused, saying that he would 
take the next day’s catch. ‘ Tomorrow, you shall fish for me,’ 
he said. He then returned to his palace. Next day he sent one 
of his officers for the boy. When they arrived he made the 
boy sit on the throne beside him. ‘ Sire,’ said one of his 
courtiers, ‘this boy is a beggar!’ ‘Never mind,’ replied the 
Sultan, ‘he is now my companion. Seeing that we have 
formed a partnership I cannot send him away.’ So the Sultan 
treated him as an equal. At last someone asked the boy, 
‘How has it come about that you are so honoured?’ The boy 


( 48 ) 

replied: 'Joy has come, and sorrow is past, because I met 
with a fortunate monarch.’ 


MAHMUD AND THE WOODCUTTER 

Another time when Sultan Mahmud was riding alone he 
met an old woodcutter leading his donkey loaded with 
brambles. At that moment the donkey stumbled, and as he 
fell the thorns skinned the old man’s head. The Sultan 
seeing the brambles on the ground, the donkey upside 
down, and the man rubbing his head, asked; ‘O unlucky 
man, do you need a friend?’ 'Indeed I do,’ replied the 
woodcutter. 'Good cavalier, if you will help me I shall reap 
the benefit and you will come to no harm. Your looks are a 
good omen for me. It is well known that one meets with 
good-will from those who have a pleasing countenance.’ So 
the kind-hearted Sultan got off his horse, and having pulled 
the donkey to its feet, lifted up the faggot of thorns and 
fastened it on its back. Then he rode off to rejoin his army. 
He said to the soldiers : 'An old woodcutter is coming along 
with a donkey loaded with brambles. Bar the way so that he 
will have to pass in front of me.’ When the woodcutter came 
up to the soldiers he said to himself, ' How shall I get through 
with this feeble beast?’ So he went by another way, but 
catching sight of the royal parasol in the distance began to 
tremble, for the road he was compelled to take would bring 
him face to face with the Sultan. As he got nearer he was 
overcome with confusion for under the parasol he saw a 
familiar face. 'O God,’ he said, 'what a state I’m in! Today 
I have had Mahmud for my porter.’ 

When he came up, Mahmud said to him: ‘My poor friend, 
what do you do for a living?’ The woodcutter replied, 'You 
know already. Be honest. You don’t recognize me? I am a 
poor old man, a woodcutter by trade; day and night I gather 
brambles in the desert and sell them, yet my donkey dies of 


( 49 ) 

hunger. If you wish me well give me some bread.’ ‘You 
poor man,’ said the Sultan, ‘how much do you want for your 
faggot?’ The woodcutter replied: ‘Since you do not wish to 
take it for nothing and I do not wish to sell it, give me a 
purse of gold.’ At this the soldiers cried out: ‘Hold your 
tongue, fool! Your faggot is not worth a handful of barley. 
You should give it for nothing.’ The old man said: ‘That is 
all very well, but its value has changed. When a lucky man 
like the Sultan puts his hands to my bundle of thorns they 
become bunches of roses. If he wishes to buy them he must 
pay a dinar at the very least for he has raised the value of 
my thorns a hundred times by touching them.’ 


i8 

SPEECH OF THE SECOND BIRD 

Another bird came up to the Hoopoe and said: ‘O protec- 
tress of the army of Solomon! I have not the strength to 
undertake this journey. I am too weak to cross the valleys. 
The road is so difficult that I shall lie down and die at the 
first stage. There are volcanoes in the way. Also, it is not 
expedient for everyone to engage in such an enterprise. 
Thousands of heads have rolled like the balls in polo, for 
many have perished who went in quest of the Simurgh. On 
such a road, where many sincere creatures have hidden their 
heads in fear, what shall become of me, who am only dust?’ 

The Hoopoe replied : ‘O you of the doleful countenance I 
Why is your heart so oppressed? Since you are of so little 
value in the world it is all the same whether you be young 
and valiant or old and feeble. The world is truly ordure; 
creatures perish there at every door. Thousands turn yellow 
as silk, and perish in the midst of tears and affliction. It is 
better to lose your life in the quest than to languish miser- 
ably. If we should not succeed, but die of grief, ah well, so 


( 5 °) 

much the worse, but, since errors are numerous in this 
world, we may at least avoid acquiring new ones. Thousands 
of creatures are craftily occupied in the pursuit of the dead 
body of the world; so, if you give yourself up to this com- 
merce, above all with guile, will you be able to make your 
heart an ocean of love? Some say that the wish for spiritual 
things is presumption, and that no mere upstart can attain 
them. But isn’t it better to sacrifice one’s life in pursuit of 
this desire than to be identified with a business? I have seen 
everything and done everything, and nothing will shake my 
resolve. For a long time I have had to do with men and have 
seen how few there be who are truly unattached to riches. 
So long as we do not die to ourselves, and so long as we 
are identified with someone or something, we shall never 
be free. The spiritual way is not for those wrapped up in 
exterior life. Set your foot in this Way if you are a man who 
can act, and do not indulge in feminine shifts. Know surely, 
that even if this quest were impious, it would still be neces- 
sary to undertake it. Certainly, it is not easy; the fruit is 
without leaves on the tree of love. Tell him who has leaves 
to renounce them. 

‘When love possesses a man it lifts his heart, it plunges 
him in blood, it throws him prostrate outside the curtain, it 
gives him no rest for a single instant; it kills him yet still 
demands the price of blood. He drinks the water of tears 
and eats bread leavened with mourning; but be he more 
feeble than an ant, love will lend him strength.’ 

ANECDOTE OF A CONTEMPLATIVE 

A madman, a fool of God, went naked when other men 
went clothed. He said: ‘O God, give me a beautiful garment, 
then I shall be content as other men.’ A voice from the 
unseen world answered him : ‘ I have given you a warm sun, 
sit down and revel in it.’ The madman said: ‘Why punish 


( 51 ) 

me? Haven’t you a better garment than the sun?’ The voice 
said: ‘Wait patiently for ten days, and without more ado I 
will give you another garment.’ The sun scorched him for 
eight days; then a poor man came along and gave him a 
garment which had a thousand patches. The fool said to 
God : ‘O you who have knowledge of hidden things, why 
have you given me this patched-up garment? Have you 
burnt all your garments and had to patch up this old one? 
You have sewn together a thousand garments. From whom 
have you learned this art?’ 

It is not easy to have dealings at the Court of God. A man 
must become as the dust of the road which leads there. After 
a long struggle he thinks he has reached the goal only to 
discover that it is still to be attained. 


STORY OF RABi’ah 

Rabi’ah, although a woman, was the crown of men. She 
once spent eight years making a pilgrimage to the Ka’aba 
by measuring her length on the ground. When at last she 
reached the door of the sacred temple she thought: ‘ Now at 
last, have I performed my task.’ On the consecrated day, 
when she was to go in to the Ka’aba, her women deserted 
her. So Rabi’ah retraced her steps and said: ‘O God, posses- 
sor of glory, for eight years I have measured the way with 
the length of my body, and now, when the longed-for day 
has come in answer to my prayers, you put thorns in my 
way!’ 

To understand the importance of such an incident it is 
necessary to discover a lover of God like Rabi’ah. So long 
as you float on the deep ocean of the world its waves will 
receive and repel you, turn by tura At times you will be 
admitted into the Ka’aba, sometimes you will sigh in a 
pagoda. If you succeed in withdrawing from the attach- 
ments of the world you will enjoy felicity; but if you 


( 50 

remain attached your head will turn like the grindstone of 
a mill. Not for a moment will you be tranquil; you will be 
upset by a single fly. 

THE FOOL OF GOD 

It was the custom of a poor man in love with God to stand 
in a certain place; and one day a king of Egypt who had 
often passed him with his courtiers, stopped, and said: ‘I 
see in you a certain quality of tranquillity and relaxation.’ 
The fool replied: "How should I be tranquil, seeing that I 
am delivered up to the flies and the fleas? All day the flies 
torment me, and at night the fleas won’t let me sleep. One 
tiny fly which entered the ear of Nimrod troubled the brain 
of that idiot for centuries. Perhaps I am the Nimrod of these 
times for I have had my share of my friends, the flies and the 
fleas.’ 


19 

SPEECH OF THE THIRD BIRD 

The third bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘I am full of faults, so 
how shall I set out on the road? Can a dirty fly be worthy 
of the Simurgh of the Caucasus? How can a sinner who 
turns away from the true path approach the King?’ 

The Hoopoe said: ‘O despondent bird, do not be so 
hopeless, ask for grace and favour. If you so lightly throw 
away the shield your task truly will be difficult.’ 

ANECDOTE OF A CRIMINAL 

A man guilty of many sins repented bitterly and returned to 
the right path. But in time, his desire for the things of the 
world returned stronger than ever, and he again surrendered 
himself to evil thoughts and acts. Then sorrow wrung his 
heart and reduced him to a miserable state. Again he wished 


( 55 ) 

to change his attitude, but had not the strength to do so. 
Day and night as a grain of wheat in a hot pan, his heart 
could not keep still, and his tears watered the dust. One 
morning, a mysterious voice spoke to him: ‘Listen to the 
Lord of the World. When you repented the first time I 
accepted your penitence. Though I could have punished 
you I did not do so. A second time when you fell into sin 
I gave you a respite, and now even in my anger I have not 
caused you to die. And today, O fool, you acknowledge 
your perfidy and wish to return to me a third time. Return 
then, to the Way. I open my door to you and wait. When 
ydU have truly changed your attitude your sins will be 
forgiven.’ 


THE ANGEL GABRIEL AND THE GOOD INTENTION 

One night, when the Angel Gabriel was in the Sidrah he 
heard God pronounce the words of consent, and he said to 
himself: ‘A serv^ant of God at this moment invokes the 
Eternal, but who can he be? I only know that he must be 
of great merit, that his body of desire is dead and that his 
spirit is living.’ And at once he set off to find this happy 
mortal. But though he searched the earth and the islands, 
the mountains and the plains, he could not find him. So 
he returned to God, and again heard a favourable response 
to the prayer. 

Once more he flew over earth and sea, but at last he had 
to ask: ‘O God, which way will lead me to }Our servant?’ 
God said: ‘Go to the country of Rum, and in a certain 
Christian monastery you will find him.’ Gabriel flew off to 
the monaster}" and there he saw the object of celestial favours 
bowing before an idol. ‘O master of the world,’ said Gabriel, 
‘ draw aside the veil from this mystery. How can you answer 
the prayer of an idol- worshipper in a monastery?’ God said: 
‘His heart is darkened. He is unaware that he has lost his 


( 54 ) 

way. Since he strays through ignorance my loving-kindness 
pardons him and I have opened the way for him to a high 
estate.’ Then the Most High unloosed the man’s tongue so 
that he could pronounce the name of God. 

One must not neglect the smallest thing. Renunciation is 
not bought in a shop ; neither can you reach the court of the 
Most High by paying a small sum. 


THE SUFI 

As a Sufi was hurrying to Baghdad he heard someone say: 
‘ I have a lot of honey which I would sell very reasonably if 
there were anyone to buy it.’ The Sufi said: ‘My good 
fellow, wouldn’t you like to give me a little for nothing?’ 
The man angrily replied : ‘Go away. Are you mad as well as 
greedy? Don’t you know that one always gets nothing for 
nothing?’ Then an inner voice said to the Sufi: ‘Leave this 
place and I will give you that which money cannot buy : all 
good fortune and all that you desire. God’s mercy is a burn- 
ing sun which reaches to the smallest atom. God even 
rebuked the prophet Moses because of an unbeliever.’ 


GOD REBUKES MOSES 

One day God said to Moses: ‘Korah, sobbing, called you 
seventy times and you did not reply. If he had called me thus, 
once, I would have wrested his heart from the pit of poly- 
theism and covered his breast with a vestment of faith. O 
Moses, you have caused him to perish in a hundred agonies, 
you have cast him into the earth with disgrace. If you had 
been his creator you would have been less stern with him.’ 

He who is merciful even to those who are without mercy 
is highly favoured by compassionate men. If you commit 
the faults of ordinary sinners you yourself will become one 
of the wicked. 


20 


THE QUERY OF THE FOURTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe : ‘ I am effeminate, and can 
only hop from one branch to another. Sometimes I am 
wanton and dissolute, at other times I am abstinent. Some- 
times my desires drag me to the taverns, sometimes my 
spirit draws me to prayer. Sometimes, in spite of myself, 
Satan leads me astray ; at other times angels guide me back. 
Between these two I am in the pit and the prison; what can 
I do save lament, like Joseph?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘This happens to every man, 
according to his nature. If we had been guiltless from the 
beginning God would not have had to send his messengers 
and prophets. Through obedience you can attain felicity. 
O you who loll in the sweating room of indolence and yet 
are full of idle wishes, while you continue to feed the dog of 
desire your nature is worse than that of an impotent 
hermaphrodite.’ 

ANECDOTE OF SHABLI 

Shabli once disappeared from Baghdad, no one knew where. 
At last he was discovered in a house of eunuchs, sitting with 
humid eye and dry lips among these grotesque creatures. 
His friends said: ‘This is no place for you who are a student 
of divine mysteries.’ He replied: ‘These persons, in the way 
of religion, are neither men nor women. I am as they. I sink 
in inertia, and my virility is a reproach. If you use praise and 
blame to make distinctions you are creating idols. When you 
conceal a hundred idols under your khirka, why appear 
before men as a Sufi?’ 

QUARREL OF TWO SUFIS 

Two men wearing the khirka of the Sufis were abusing each 
other before the tribunal. The judge stood them apart and 


( 36 ) 

said: ‘It is not becoming for Sufis to dispute among them- 
selves. If you have put on the mantle of resignation why 
quarrel? If you are men of violence then throw away your 
mantles. But if you are worthy of them be reconciled to each 
other. I who am a judge, and not a man of the spiritual way, 
am ashamed for the khirka; it would be better to agree to 
differ than, while wearing it, to quarrel.’ 

If you wish to follow the way of love throw your pre- 
judices to the wind and renounce attachment to the things 
of the body. Meanwhile, in order not to be a source of evil, 
do not give way to resentment and self-love ! 

THE KING AND THE BEGGAR 

Once upon a time in Egypt an unfortunate man fell in love 
with the king, who when he heard about it sent for the mis- 
guided man and said : ‘ Since you are in love with me you 
must choose one of two things — either have your head cut 
off or go into exile.’ The man said that he preferred exile, 
and almost beside himself, got ready to go. But the king 
ordered him to be beheaded. A chamberlain said: ‘He is 
innocent; why must he die?’ ‘It is,’ said the king, ‘because 
he is not a true lover and was not whole-hearted. Had he 
really desired me, he would rather have lost his head than 
leave the object of his love. It would have been all or 
nothing. Had he consented to execution, I would have 
girded up my loins and become his dervish. He who loves 
me, but loves his head better, is no true lover.’ 

21 

EXCUSES OF THE FIFTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘I am my own enemy; 
there is a thief in me. How can I make this journey hindered 
by bodily appetites and a dog of desire which wiU not 
submit? How can I save my soul? The prowling wolf I 


( 57 ) 

know but this dog I do not know, and he is so attractive. I 
know not where I am with this unfaithful body. Will I ever 
understand it?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘You yourself are a stray dog, 
trampled underfoot. This “soul” of yours is one-eyed and 
squinting; vile, slothful and unfaithful. If a man is drawn to 
you it is because he is dazzled by the tinsel glitter of your 
“soul”. It is not good for this dog of desire to be pampered 
and rubbed with oils. As a child, man is weak and heedless; 
as a youth he is engaged in struggle; and when old age 
takes possession desire languishes and the body is feeble. 
Existence being such, how will this dog acquire the orna- 
ment of spiritual qualities? From beginning to end we live 
heedlessly, and obtain nothing. Often a man comes to the 
end empty, with nothing in him except a desire for the 
things of exterior life. Thousands perish from grief, but this 
dog of desire never dies. Listen to the story of a grave- 
digger who had grown old in his trade. Someone asked 
him: “Will you answer a question for me since you have 
spent your whole life digging graves. Tell me if you have 
ever seen a marvel?” He said: “My dog of desire has seen 
the dead buried for seventy years, but he himself has not 
once died, nor for a single moment has he obeyed the laws 
of God. This is a marvel!”’ 

AN ANECDOTE OF ABBASAH 

One evening, Abbasah said: ‘Supposing that the un- 
believers who fill the earth, and even the loquacious 
Turkomans, should sincerely accept the Faith — such a thing 
could be possible. But a hundred and twenty thousand 
prophets have been sent to the unbelieving soul so that it 
should accept the Musulman faith or perish, and they have 
not yet succeeded. Why so much zeal and so little result?’ 

We are all under the domination of the Nafs of this 
unfaithful disobedient body, which we maintain in ourselves. 

E 


( 58 ) 

Helped as it is from two sides, it were astonishing if this 
body perished. The Spirit, like a faithful knight, rides on, 
but always the dog is his companion; he may gallop but the 
dog follows. The love the heart receives is taken by the body. 
Yet he who makes himself master of this dog will take in his 
net the lion of the tv^o worlds. 

22 

A KING QUESTIONS A DERVISH 

A king once saw a man, who, though clad in rags was 
working in the way of self-perfection. He called him and 
asked: ‘Who is the better off, you or I?’ The man said: ‘O 
ignorant one, beat your breast and hold your tongue. Who 
praises himself does not understand the meaning of words; 
but this I must say, there can be no doubt that a man such 
as I is a thousand times better off than a man such as you. 
With not even the taste of religion, your dog of desire has 
reduced you to the status of an ass. He is your master and 
rides you on a bridle pulling your head this way and that. 
You do all that he commands. You are a non-entity, and fit 
for nothing, whereas I who know the secrets of the heart 
have made of this dog, my ass to ride upon. Your dog rules 
you, but if you will make of it an ass you are then as I, and 
a hundred times better off than your fellows.’ 

EXCUSE OF THE SIXTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘Whenever I wish to enter 
the Way the devil rouses my vanity and prevents me from 
seeking a guide. My heart is troubled, for I have not the 
strength to resist him. How can I save myself from Iblis and 
be vivified by the wine of the Spirit?’ 

The Hoopoe replied : ‘ So long as the dog of desire runs 
before you the devil will not leave you, but will use the dog’s 
allurements to mislead you. Then each of your vain desires 


( 39 ) 

becomes a demon, and each one yielded to begets a hundred 
others. This world is a sweating room or prison, the domain 
of the devil; have no truck with it or with its master.’ 

COMPLAINT OF A NOVICE ON THE TEMPTATION 
OF A DEMON 

A heedless youth went to one who was fasting to complain 
of forty temptations of a demon. He said: ‘The demon keeps 
me from the Way, and he has reduced my religion to 
nothing.’ The shaikh said: ‘My dear young man, just before 
you came to me I saw the demon prowling round you. 
Contrary to what you say he was vexed and was throwing 
dust on his head because you had ill-treated him and he said 
to me: “ The whole world is my domain but I have no power 
over him who is the enemy of the world.” Tell the demon to 
pass on, and he will leave you alone.’ 

THE KHOJA AND THE SUFI 

A Sufi heard a Khoja utter this prayer: ‘O God have mercy 
on me and favour my enterprises’, and said to him: ‘Do not 
hope for mercy if you have not taken the khirka of a Sufi. 
You have lifted your face towards heaven and the four 
golden walls. You are served by ten male and ten female 
slaves. How shall divine grace come to you in secret? 
Observe yourself and see if you merit favours. Since you 
pray for possessions and honours, mercy will hide its face. 
Turn away from all this, and be free, as are the perfected 
men.’ 


23 

EXCUSE OF THE SEVENTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘I love gold; for me if is 
like the almond in its shell. If I do not have gold I am bound 
hand and foot. Love of worldly things and love of gold have 


(6o) 

filled me with vain desires which blind me to spiritual 
things.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: "O you who are dazzled by exterior 
forms, in whose heart the value of real things never dawns ! 
You are Like a man who can see only in the dark, a nyctalope; 
you are like an ant, attracted by appearances. Try to under- 
stand the sense of things. Without its colour gold would be 
an ordinary metal; yet you are seduced by colour, like a 
child. Love of gold is not becoming to a real man; why, 
they hide it in the vagina of a mule ! Does one hide precious 
things in such a place? If you let no one benefit by your gold 
you will not profit either. But if you give an obol to some 
poor wretch, both of you will profit. If you have gold you 
can benefit many; but if your shoulder is marked, that also 
is because of gold. For a shop, you must pay rent and some- 
times the price is your own soul. You sacrifice everything 
for your business, even those to whom you are most 
attached, and in the end you have nothing. We can only hope 
that fortune will leave a ladder under the gallows. It does 
not mean that you should make no use at all of the things of 
the world, but you should spend on all sides that which you 
possess. Good fortune will come to you only as you give. 
If you cannot renounce life completely you can at least free 
yourself from the love of riches and honours.’ 


THE PIR AND HIS COMPANION 

A young pupil, unknown to his shaikh (as he thought) had 
a small hoard of gold pieces. The shaikh said nothing, and 
one day they set out together on a journey. At length they 
came to a dark valley at the entrance of which were two 
roads. The pupil began to be afraid, for gold corrupts its 
possessor. Trembling, he asked the shaikh, ‘Which road 
ought we to take?’ The shaikh replied: ‘Get rid of that 
which makes you afraid, then either road will be good. The 


(6i) 

devil fears hirn who is indifferent to money, and promptly 
flees from him. For the sake of a grain of gold you would 
split a hair. In the way of religion gold is like a lame donkey; 
it has no value, only weight. When wealth comes to a man 
unawares it first bewilders him, then governs him. He who 
is identified with the love of money and possessions has been 
bound hand and foot and thrown into a pit. Avoid this deep 
pit if you can, if not, hold your breath, for the air in it is 
quite extraordinary.’ 

GOD REBUKES A DERVISH 

A holy man who had found prosperity in God gave himself 
up to worship and adoration for forty years. He had fled 
from the world, but since God was intimately united to him 
he was satisfied. This dervish had enclosed a plot of ground 
in the desert; in the middle of it was a tree, and in the tree 
a bird had made its nest. The song of the bird was sweet to 
hear for in each of its notes were a hundred secrets. The 
servant of God was enchanted. But God told a seer about 
this state of things in these words: ‘Tell this Sufi I am 
astonished that after so many years of devotion he has ended 
by selling me for a bird. It is true that this bird is admirable, 
but its song has caught him in a snare. I have bought him, 
and he has sold me.’ 


24 

EXCUSES OF THE EIGHTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe : ‘ My heart is aglow with 
pleasure for I live in a charming spot. I have a golden palace, 
so beautiful that everyone admires it, and there I exist in a 
world of contentment. How can I be expected to give it 
up? In this palace I am as a king among birds, why then 
should I expose myself to hardships in the valleys of which 
you speak? Must I give up both my palace and my royalty? 


(62) 

No reasonable creature would forsake the garden of Irem 
to undertake so toilsome and difficult a journey!’ 

The Hoopoe replied: you who are without aspiration 

and energy! Are you a dog? or do you wish to be an atten- 
dant in the hammam? This lower world is only a hot-room 
and your palace is part of it. Even if your palace is a para- 
dise, nevertheless, death will one day turn it into a prison 
of suffering. Only if death ceases to exercise his power over 
creatures would it be expedient for you to remain content 
in your golden palace.’ 

A sage’s jest concerning a palace 
A king built a palace which cost him a hundred thousand 
dinars. Outside it was adorned with gilded towers and 
cupolas, and the furniture and carpets made the interior a 
paradise. When it was finished he invited men from every 
country to visit him. They came and presented gifts, and he 
made them all sit down with him. Then he asked them: 
‘Tell me what you think of my palace. Has anything been 
forgotten which mars its beauty?’ They all protested that 
never had there been such a palace on earth and never would 
its like be seen again. All, that is, except one, a Sage, who 
stood up and said: ‘ Sire, there is one small crevice w^hich to 
me seems a blemish. Were it not for this blemish, paradise 
itself would bring gifts to you from the invisible world.’ 

‘I don’t see this blemish,’ said the king angrily. ‘You are 
an ignorant person and you only wish to make yourself 
important.’ ‘No, proud King,’ replied the Sage. ‘This chink 
of which I speak is that through which Azrael, the angel of 
death, will come. Would to God you could stop it up, for 
otherwise, what use is your gorgeous palace, your crown 
and your throne? When death comes the)’' will be as a hand- 
ful of dust. Nothing lasts, and it is this which spoils the 
beauty of your dwelling. No art can make stable that which 
is unstable. Ah, do not put your hopes of happiness upon 


( 63 ) 

a palace! Do not let the courser of your pride caracole. If no 
one dares speak plainly to the king and remind him of his 
faults, that is a great misfortune.’ 

THE SPIDER 

Have you ever watched the spider and noted how fantasti- 
cally she spends her time? With speed and foresight she 
spins her marv^ellous web, a house which she garnishes for 
her use. When the fly falls headlong into the web, she rushes 
up, sucks the little creature’s blood and leaves the body to 
dry for use as food. Then, along comes the householder 
with a broom, and in an instant web, fly and spider are gone 
— all three ! 

The web represents the world; the fly, the subsistence 
which God has placed there for man. Even if all the world 
should fall to you, you may lose it in an instant. You are- 
but an infant on the path of understanding; yet you stand 
trifling outside the curtain. Do not strive after place and 
position if you have not eaten the brain of an ass. And 
know, heedless fool, that this world is given over to the 
bulls. He for whom drums and flags denote high dignity 
will never become a dervdsh; these things are but the 
whistling of the wind, of less value than the smallest coin. 
Curb the caracoling of the courser of your folly, and do not 
be deluded by the possession of power. As the panther is 
flayed, so your life will be snatched away. 

Open the eye of true aspiration and discover the spiritual 
Path; put your feet in the Way of God and seek his celestial 
court. Once you have glimpsed that you will no longer be 
attached to the glitter of this world. 

THE MISANTHROPIC DERVISH 

A man, tired and dispirited, weary with walking in the 
desert came at last to a place where lived a solitary dervish, 
and said to him: ‘O Dervish, how are things with you?’ 


( 64 ) 

The dervish replied; ‘Aren’t you ashamed to ask such a 
question when here I stay in a place so confined and shut 
in?’ The man said: ‘That isn’t true. How can you be shut in, 
living in this vast desert?’ The dervish added: ‘If the world 
were not so small, you never would have lighted on me!’ 

25 

EXCUSE OF THE NINTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O most eminent bird, I 
am the slave of a charming being who has taken possession 
of me and deprived me of my reason. The image of her dear 
face is a thief of the great Path; she has put fire to the harvest 
of my life, and when I am absent from her I have not a 
moment’s peace. Since my heart is on fire with passion I do 
not see how I can set out on this journey. I should have to 
cross the valleys and go through a hundred trials. Can I be 
expected to forsake this beauty to travel through scorching 
heat and bitter cold? I am too weak to go without her; and 
I am but the dust on her road. Such is my state. What can 
Ido?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘You are attached to visible things, 
and are head and foot in the suffering which follows from 
this. Sensual love is a game. Love which is inspired by 
passing beauty is itself fleeting. You are always comparing 
a body of blood and moods to the beauty of the moon. 
What is uglier than a body composed of flesh and bones? 
True beauty is hidden. Seek it then, in the invisible world. 
If the veil which hides the mysteries from our eyes should 
fall, nothing would be left in the world. AU visible forms 
would be reduced to nothing.’ 

AN ANECDOTE OF SHABLI 

A man came to Shabli one day, weeping. The Sufi asked him 
why he wept. ‘O Shaikh,’ he said, ‘I had a friend whose 


( 65 ) 

beauty made my soul as verdant as branches in spring. 
Yesterday, he died, and I too shall die of sorrow.’ Shabli 
said : ‘ Why do you grieve? For a long time you have had his 
friendship. Go now and choose another friend, one who 
will not die, then you will not lay up for yourself a cause for 
grief. Attachment to a mortal can only bring sorrow.’ 

THE RICH MERCHANT 

A merchant rich in goods and money had a slave who was 
sweet as sugar. Nevertheless, he decided one day to sell her. 
But it was not long before he began to miss her. In his long- 
ing he went to the new master and begged him to let her go, 
and offered a thousand pieces of gold to buy her back. But 
he refused to part with her. So the merchant went out, and 
throwing dust on his head said: ‘It is my own fault, for 
having sewn up my lips and my eye; in my greed I have sold 
my mistress for a piece of gold. It was a bad day for me 
when I dressed her up in her best attire and took her to the 
bazaar to sell for a good profit.’ 

Each of your breaths, which measure your existence, is 
a pearl, and each of your atoms is a guide to God. The 
benefits of this friend cover you from head to foot. If you 
were truly aware of him how could you support the 
separation? 


ANECDOTE OF HALLAJ 

When they were about to impale Hallaj, he only uttered 
these words: ‘I am God.’ They cut off his hands and feet so 
that he became pale from loss of blood. Then he drew the 
stumps of his wrists across his face saying : ‘ It will not do for 
me to look pale today or they will think I am afraid. I will 
redden my face so that when the bloody man who has carried 
out the sentence turns towards the gibbet, he will see that 
I am a brave man.’ 


( 66 ) 

He who eats and sleeps in the month of July with the 
dragon of seven heads will fare very badly in such a game, 
but the gibbet will be a very small thing for him. 


26 

EXCUSE OF THE TENTH BIRD 

This bird said to the Hoopoe: H am afraid of death. Now 
this valley is wide, and I have nothing at all for the journey. 

I am so filled with the fear of death that my life will leave 
me at the first stopping place. Even were I a powerful emir, 
in the hour of death I should fear no less. He who with a 
sword would iry to ward off death, shall have it broken like 
a Kalam; for alas, faith in the strength of the hand and of 
the sword brings only disappointment and sorrow.’ 

The Hoopoe replied; ‘O you who are fickle and weak- 
willed, do you wish to remain a mere frame of bone and 
marrow? Don’t you know that life, be it long or short, is 
composed of a few breaths? Don’t you understand that 
whoever is born must also die? That he goes into the earth 
and that the wind disperses the elements of which his body 
was made? 

‘ You were nourished for death ; and you were brought into 
the world in order to be taken away from it ! The sky is like 
a dish upside down, which ever}' evening is immersed in the 
blood of sunset. One could say that the sun, armed with a 
scimitar, is cutting off heads on this dish. Whether you 
be good or bad you are only a drop of water kneaded with 
earth. Though all your life you may have been in a position 
of authority, you will, in the end, give up the ghost in 
affliction.’ 

THE PHOENIX 

The Phoenix is an admirable and lovely bird which lives in 
Hindustan. It has no mate and lives alone. Its beak, which 


( 6 ?) 

is very long and hard, is pierced like a flute with nearly 
a hundred holes. Each of these holes gives out a sound 
and in each sound is a particular secret. Sometimes he 
makes music through the holes, and when the birds and 
the fishes hear his sweet plaintive notes they are agitated, 
and the most ferocious beasts are in rapture; then they 
all become silent. A philosopher once visited this bird 
and learnt from him the science of music. The Phoenix 
lives about a thousand years and he knows exactly the 
day of his death. When his time comes he gathers round 
him a quantity of palm leaves and, distraught among the 
leaves, utters plaintive cries. From the openings in his 
beak he sends forth varied notes, and this music is drawn 
from the depths of his heart. His lamentations express the 
sorrow of death, and he trembles like a leaf. At the sound 
of his trumpet the birds and the beasts draw near to assist 
at the spectacle. Now they fall into bewilderment, and 
many die because their strength fails them. While the 
Phoenix still has breath, he beats his wings and ruffles his 
feathers, and by this produces fire. The fire spreads to the 
palm fronds, and soon both the fronds and the bird are 
reduced to living coals and then to ashes. But when the last 
spark has flickered out a new small Phoenix arises from 
the ashes. 

Has it ever happened to anyone to be re-born after death? 
Even if you lived as long as the Phoenix, nevertheless you 
would die when the measure of your life was taken. His 
thousand years of life are filled with lamentations and he 
remains alone without companions or children, and has 
contact with no one. When the end comes he throws his 
ashes to the wind so that you may know that none can escape 
death whatever trick he may use. Learn then from the 
miracle of the Phoenix. Death is a tyrant, but we must always 
keep death in mind. And, although we have much to endure, 
it is nothing compared with dying. 


( 68 ) 

COUNSEL OF TAI WHEN DYING 

When Tai lay dying someone asked him: ‘O Tai, you have 
seen the essence of things, how is it with you now?’ He 
said : ‘ I can say nothing about my state. I have measured the 
wind all the days of my life, and now the end is come I shall 
be buried, and so, good night.’ 

There is no other remedy for death than to look death 
constantly in the face. We all are born to die; life will not 
stay with us; we must submit. Even he who held the world 
under the seal of his ring is now only a mineral in the earth. 

JESUS AND THE PITCHER OF WATER 

Jesus drank of the water of a limpid rill whose taste was 
more agreeable than the dew of the rose. One of his com- 
panions filled a pitcher from this rill, and they went on their 
way. Jesus, being thirsty, took a sip of water from the 
pitcher, but the water was bitter, and he stopped in astonish- 
ment and prayed: ‘O God, the water of the rill and the 
water in the pitcher are the same. Tell me why the one 
is sweeter than honey and the other so bitter?’ The 
pitcher* then spoke, and said to Jesus: ‘I am very old, and 
I have been fashioned over a thousand times under the 
firmament of the nine cupolas — sometimes as a vase, some- 
times as a pitcher, sometimes as a ewer. Whatever form I 
took I have always had in me the bitterness of death. I am 
so made that the water I hold will always partake of that 
bitterness.’ 

O heedless man! Try to understand the meaning of the 
pitcher. Strive to discover the mystery before life is taken 
from you. If while living you fail to find yourself, to know 
yourself, how will you be able to understand the secret of 
your existence when you die? You participate in the life of 
man yet you are only a psuedo man. 


( 69 ) 

SOCRATES TO HIS DISCIPLES 

When Socrates was about to die, one of his pupils said to 
him: ‘My master, when we have washed you and put on 
your shroud where do you want us to bury you?’ Socrates 
said: ‘If you find me, dear pupil, bury me where you will, 
and good night ! Seeing that in my long life I have not found 
myself, how will you find me when I am dead? I have lived 
in such a manner that at this moment I only know that the 
least hair of knowledge of myself is not evident.’ 


27 

EXCUSE OF THE ELEVENTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O you whose faith is 
sincere, I have not a breath of good will. I have spent my 
life in vexation, desiring the ball of the world. There is such 
a sadness in my heart that I never cease to mourn. I am always 
in a state of bewilderment and impotence; and when for a 
moment I have been content, then am I unbelieving. In 
consequence, I have become a dervish. But now I hesitate 
to start out on the road of spiritual knowledge. If my heart 
were not so full of sorrow I would be charmed with this 
journey. As it is I am in a state of perplexity. Now that I 
have put my case before you tell me what I ought to do.’ 

The Hoopoe said: ‘You, who are given over to pride, 
who are swallowed up in self-pity, you do well to be dis- 
turbed. Seeing that the world passes, you yourself should 
pass it by. Abandon it, for whoever becomes identified with 
transient things can have no part in the things that are last- 
ing. The sufferings you endure can be made glorious and 
not humiliating. That which in outward appearance is suffer- 
ing can be a treasure for the seer. A hundred blessings will 
come to you if you make effort on the Path. But as you are, 
you are only a skin covering a dull brain.’ 


THE GRATEFUL SLAVE 

One day a good-natured king gave a rare and beautiful 
fruit to a slave, who tasted it and thereupon said that never 
in his life had he eaten anything so delicious. This made the 
king wish to try it himself, and he asked the slave for a piece. 
But when he put it into his mouth he found it very bitter and 
he raised his eyebrows in astonishment. The slave said : ^ Sire, 
since I have received so many gifts at your hand how can I 
complain of one bitter fruit? Seeing that you shower benefits 
on me why should one bitterness estrange me from you?’ 

So, servant of God, if you experience suffering in your 
striving, be persuaded that it can be a treasure for you. The 
thing seems topsy-turvy but, remember the slave. 

THE SHAIKH AND THE OLD WOMAN 

An old woman said to Shaikh Mahmah: ‘Teach me a prayer 
so that I may find contentment. So far I have always been 
a prey to discontent, but I now wish to be free.’ 

The shaikh replied: ‘A long time ago I withdrew into a 
sort of fortress behind my knee to seek ardently that which 
you desire ; but I have neither felt it nor seen it. So long as we 
do not accept everything in the way of love, how can we be 
content?’ 

A QUESTION TO JUNAID 

Someone asked Junaid: ‘Slave of God who yet are free, tell 
me how to reach a state of contentment?’ Junaid replied: 
‘When one has learned, through love, to accept.’ 

The atom has only an apparent brilliance. By nature it is 
only an atom, but if it loses itself in the sun, it will thereby 
share his quality for ever. 

THE BAT IN SEARCH OF THE SUN 

One night a bat was heard to say : ‘ How is it that I am unable 
even for a moment to see the sun? All my life I have been 


( 71 ) 

in despair because not for an instant can I be lost in him. 
For months and years I have flown hither and thither with 
my eyes shut, and here I am!’ A contemplative said: 'You 
are beset with pride, and you still have thousands of years 
to travel. How can such a being as you discover the sun? 
Can an ant reach the moon?’ ‘Nevertheless,’ said the bat, 
‘ I shall still go on trying.’ And so for some years it continued 
to search until it had neither strength nor wings. As it still 
had not discovered the sun it said: ‘Perhaps I have flown 
beyond it.’ A wise bird hearing this, said: ‘You live in a 
dream; you have been going round in circles, and haven’t 
advanced a single step ; and in your pride you say you have 
gone beyond the sun I ’ This so shocked the bat that realizing 
her helplessness she humbled herself completely, saying: 
‘You have found a bird with inner sight, go no further.’ 


28 

QUESTION OF THE TWELFTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O you, who are our 
guide, what will be the result if I surrender my will to you ? 
I cannot of my own will accept the toil and suffering that 
I know I shall have to undergo, but I can agree to obey 
your commands; and if I should chance to turn my head 
away I will make amends.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘You have spoken well, one cannot 
expect better than this. For how can you remain master of 
yourself if you follow your Ukes and dislikes? But if you 
obey voluntarily you may become your own master. He 
who submits to obedience on this path is delivered from 
deception and escapes many diflSculties. One hour of serving 
God in accordance with the true law is worth a lifetime of 
serving the world. He who accepts passive suffering is like 


( 72 ) 

a stray dog which has to obey the whim of every passer-by. 
But he who endures even a moment of active suffering on 
this path is fully recompensed/ 


BAYA^ID AND TARMAZi 

A learned doctor, a pivot of the world and blessed with 
excellent qualities, recounted the following: ‘One night,’ he 
said, ‘I saw in a dream Bayazid and Tarmazi, who begged 
me to be their leader. I wondered very much why these two 
eminent shaikhs treated me with such deference. Then I 
remembered that one morning I had heaved a sigh from the 
depths of rfiy heart, and as the sigh went up it swung the 
hammer of the gate of the sanctuary, so that it was opened 
for me. I went in, and all the spiritual masters and their 
disciples, speaking without words, asked something of me — 
all except Bayazid Bistami who wished to meet me but not 
to ask anything. He said: “When I heard the summons of 
your heart I realized that all I need is to obey your orders, to 
be guided by your will. Since I am nothing, who am I to say 
what I wish? It is enough for the servant to comply with the 
wishes of his master.” 

‘ This is why the shaikhs have treated me with respect, and 
given me precedence. When a man walks in obedience he 
acts conformably with the word of God. He is no ser\^ant 
of God who boasts of being one. The true servant shows 
his quality in the time of ordeal. Submit then, to trials, so 
that you may know yourself.’ 


THE SLAVE AND THE ROBE OF HONOUR 

A king gave a robe of honour to a slave, who went away 
very pleased with himself. As he walked along, the dust of 
the street settled on him, and he thoughtlessly wiped his 
face with the sleeve of the robe. One who was jealous of him 


( 75 ) 

lost no time in informing the king, who, indignant at this 
breach of good manners, had him impaled. 

He who dishonours himself by unseemly conduct is not 
worthy to wait on the carpet of a king. 


29 

REQUEST OF THE THIRTEENTH BIRD 

Another bird asked the Hoopoe : ‘O you whose motives are 
without guile, tell me how I can be sincere on this path to 
God. Since I cannot give up the longing of my heart I spend 
all that I have to achieve my aim. What I had I lost; what I 
kept has turned to scorpions in my hands. I am bound by no 
ties and have cast off all shackles and impediments. I wish 
to be sincere in the spiritual Way in the hope of one day 
seeing the object of my worship face to face.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘The Way is not open to everyone; 
only the upright may tread it. He who strives in this Way 
must do so tranquilly and with a whole heart. When you 
have burnt all that you possess gather the ashes together and 
seat yourself upon them. Until you die to all the things of 
this world, one by one, you will not be free. And seeing that 
you will not be long in the prison of the world detach your- 
self from everything. When death comes, can the things that 
now enslave you turn him aside? To travel this road, self- 
sincerity is necessary — and to be sincere with oneself is more 
difficult than you think.’ 

ALLEGORICAL SAYING OF TARMAZ! 

The saint of Turkestan said one day to himself: H love two 
things, my son and my piebald horse. If I should hear that 
my son had died I would surrender my horse as a thanks- 
giving, for these two things are as idols to my soul.’ 

K 


( 74 ) 

Set light to your faults, your resentments, and your 
vanities. Burn them and do not flatter yourself that you are 
more sincere than others. He who prides himself on his 
sincerity should strive to see himself as he is. 

THE SHAIKH KHIRCANI AND THE AUBERGINE 

One day Shaikh Khircani, who rested upon the very throne 
of God, had an intense longing for an aubergine. He called 
for it with horn and voice, so his mother went out and got 
one. No sooner had he eaten it than it happened that they 
cut off the head of his child, and at night a wicked man 
placed it on his doorstep. The shaikh then said: "A hundred 
times I had a foreboding that if I ate so much as a small piece 
of aubergine something disastrous would happen. But the 
desire for it was so strong that I could not overcome it.’ 

He who allows his desires to master him stifles his own 
soul. The learned know nothing; there is no surety in their 
learning; and many sorts of knowledge are required. At any 
moment a new caravan may arrive and a new test. 

I know of no one so fortunate as Pharaoh’s magicians, 
who, with the faith of men today, separated their souls from 
themselves ; and, grounded in religion, relinquished all love 
for things of the world. 


30 

THE FOURTEENTH BIRD SPEAKS 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: 'O you who are clear- 
seeing ! This that you propose is a worthy aspiration. Though 
I appear to be weak, in reality I have a noble ardour; though 
I have little strength, I have a lofty ambition.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘If you have but a little of this noble 
ambition, it will triumph even over the sun. Aspiration is 
the wings and feathers of the bird of the soul.’ 


( 75 ) 

THE OLD WOMAN WHO WISHED TO BUY JOSEPH 

It is said that when they sold Joseph to the Egyptians the 
latter treated him kindly. There were many buyers so the 
merchants priced him at from five to ten times his weight in 
musk. Meanwhile, in a state of agitation, an old woman ran 
up, and going among the buyers said to an Egyptian: "Let 
me buy the Canaanite, for I long to possess that young man. 
I have spun ten spools of thread to pay for him so take them 
and give me Joseph and say no more about it.’ 

The merchants smiled and said: "Your simplicity has mis- 
led you. This unique pearl is not for you; they have already 
offered a hundred treasures for him. How can you bid 
against them with your spools of thread?’ The old woman, 
looking into their faces, said: "I know very well that you 
will not sell him for so little, but it is enough for me that my 
friends and enemies will say, ""this old woman has been 
among those who wished to buy Joseph”.’ 

He who is without aspiration will never reach the bound- 
less kingdom. Possessed of this lofty ambition a great prince 
regarded his worldly kingdom as ashes. When he realized 
the emptiness of temporal royalty, he decided that spiritual 
royalty was worth a thousand kingdoms of the world. 

IBRAHIM ADHAM 

A man was always complaining of the bitterness of poverty, 
so Ibrahim Adham said to him: "My son, perhaps you have 
not paid for your poverty?’ The man replied: "What you 
say is nonsense, how can one buy poverty?’ "I at least,’ said 
Adham, "have chosen it voluntarily and I have bought it at 
the price of the kingdom of the world. And I would still 
buy a moment of this poverty for a hundred of those 
worlds.’ 

Men who have a thirst for self-perfection stake both soul 
and body on the issue. The bird of aspiration soars to God, 


( 76 ) 


lifted on the wings of faith above things temporal and spiri- 
tual. If you have not this aspiration it is better to withdraw. 


THE WORLD ACCORDING TO A SUFI 

A Sufi woke one night and said to himself: ‘It seems to me 
that the world is like a chest in which we are put and the lid 
shut down, and we give ourselves up to foolishness. When 
death lifts the lid, he who has acquired wings, soars away 
to eternity, but he who has not, stays in the chest a prey to 
a thousand tribulations. Make sure then that the bird of 
ambition acquires wings of aspiration, and give to your 
heart and reason the ecstasy of the soul. Before the lid of the 
chest is opened become a bird of the Spirit, ready to spread 
your wings.’ 


31 

THE QUERY OF THE FIFTEENTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘If the King of whom we 
speak is just and faithful, God has given us, also, uprightness 
and integrity; and I have never been lacking in justice 
towards anyone. When these qualities are found in a man 
how will he rank in the knowledge of spiritual things?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘Justice is the king of salvation. He 
who is just is saved from all kinds of errors and futilities. It 
is better to be just than to pass your whole life in the genu- 
flexions and prostrations of exterior worship. Even liberality 
is not equal in the two worlds to justice exercised in secret; 
but he who professes justice openly will find it difficult not 
to become a hypocrite. As for men of the spiritual Way they 
ask justice of no one but they receive it generously from 
God.’ 

ANECDOTE OF THE IMAM HAMBAL 

Ahmad Hambal was the Imam of his time, and his merit 
beyond praise. Once when he wished to rest from his studies 


( 77 ) 

and his position he went out to talk with a man who was 
very poor. Someone who saw him blamed him saying: 
‘There is no one more learned than you, and you have no 
need of another man’s opinions, yet you spend your time 
with a poor wretch who goes barefoot and bareheaded.’ ‘It 
is true,’ said the Imam, ‘ that I have carried off the polo ball 
in the hadis and the sunna, and that I have more knowledge 
than this man; but in regard to understanding he is nearer 
to God than I am.’ 

You who are unjust through ignorance, reflect, at least 
for a moment, on the integrity of those who are on the path 
of the spirit. 


THE INDIAN RAJAH 

Sultan Mahmud once took prisoner an old rajah, who, 
experiencing the love of God, became a Musulman and 
renounced the two worlds. Sitting alone in his tent he 
became- quite absorbed by this, weeping bitter tears and 
heaving sighs of longing — in the day more than in the 
night, and in the night more than in the day. At last Mahmud 
heard of this and summoned him: ‘ Do not weep and lament,’ 
he said, ‘you are a Rajah and I will give you a hundred 
kingdoms for the one you have lost.’ ‘O Padishah,’ replied 
the Hindu, ‘I do not weep for my lost kingdom or my 
dignity. I weep, because on the day of resurrection, God, 
the possessor of glory, will say to me: “O disloyal man, you 
have sown against me the grain of insult. Before Mahmud 
attacked you, you never thought of me. Only when you had 
to bring your army against him and lost everything did you 
remember me. Do you think this is just?” O, young king, 
it is because I am ashamed that I weep in my old age.’ 

Listen to the words of justice and faith; listen to the 
teaching in the Diwan of the Sacred Books. If you have 
faith, then undertake the journey to which I invite you. 


( 78 ) 

But shall he who is not in the index of fidelity be found in 
the chapter of generosity! 


THE MUSLIM WARRIOR 
AND 

THE CHRISTIAN CRUSADER 

A Muslim and a Christian were fighting, and the moment 
arrived for the Muslim to say his appointed prayers, so he 
proudly demanded a respite from the Christian. The 
crusader agreed, so the Muslim went aside and said his 
prayers. When he returned they resumed the combat with 
renewed vigour. A little later the crusader in his turn asked 
for a truce to say his prayers. This being granted he with- 
drew himself, and choosing a suitable spot, bowed in the 
dust before his idol. When the Musulman saw his adversary 
with his head bowed he said to himself: ‘Now is my chance 
to gain the victory,’ thinking to strike him down by 
treachery. But an inner voice said: ‘O faithless man to betray 
your pledge, is this how you keep your word? The un- 
believer did not draw his sword against you when you 
asked for a truce. Do you not remember the words of the 
Koran: “Keep your promises faithfully.” Since an un- 
believer has been generous to you, be not wanting in regard 
to him. He has done well, you wish to do ill. Do to him 
as he has done to you. Are you, a Musulman, not to be 
worthy of trust?’ At this, the Musulmto halted. Remorse 
overcame him and he was bathed in tears from head to foot. 
When the crusader noticed this he asked the reason. ‘A 
heavenly voice,’ said the Musulman, ‘ reproached me for not 
keeping faith with you. You see me in this state because I 
have been vanquished by your generosity.’ At this the 
Christian gave a great cry, and said: ‘Since God can show 
favour to me, his guilty enemy, and rebuke his friend for 
being faithless, how can I abide in infidelity? Expound to 


( 79 ) 

me the principles of Islam so that I may accept the true faith 
and casting polytheism behind me adopt the rites of the law. 
Oh, how I regret the blindness that has hindered me until 
now from acknowledging such a Master.’ 

O you who have neglected to seek the true object of your 
desires, and are grossly lacking in the faith which is his due ! 
I think the time will come when in your presence heaven 
will recall all your acts one by one. 


JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN 

In the time of the famine, the ten brothers of Joseph made 
the long journey to Egypt. Joseph received them, his face 
covered v/ith a veil, and they recounted their hardships and 
asked for help against the terrors of famine. 

In front of Joseph was a cup, which he struck with his 
hand, and it gave out a mournful sound. The brothers were 
in a state of consternation: they loosened their tongues and 
said to him: ‘O Aziz! Do you, or does anyone, know what 
this sound signifies?’ ‘I know very well,’ said Joseph, ^but 
you will not be able to bear the telling of it; for the cup says 
that you had a brother, who was remarkable for his beauty, 
and whose name was Joseph.’ 

Then Joseph struck the cup a second time and said: ^The 
cup tells me that you threw him into a well and that you 
killed an innocent wolf and stained Joseph’s coat with the 
blood.’ 

Joseph struck the cup a third time, and again it gave out 
a mournful sound. He added: ‘The cup says that Joseph’s 
brothers plunged their father into the depths of grief and 
that they have sold Joseph. 

‘Now what have these unbelievers done with their 
brother? Fear God, at least, you who stand before me.’ 

This put them into such a state that they sweated with 
fear, they, who had come to ask for bread. In selling Joseph 


(80) 

they had sold themselves; when they put him in the well 
they themselves were cast into a pit of affliction. 

He who reads this story without profit is blind. Do not 
listen with indifference, for this is none other than your 
own story. You continue to commit sins and faults because 
you have not been lighted with the light of understanding. 
If someone strikes the cup of your life, then unveil to your- 
self your guilty deeds. When the cup of your life is struck 
and you wake from sleep; when your injustices and sins are 
exposed one by one, I doubt if you will keep your peace or 
your reason. You are like a lame ant in a bowl. How often 
have you turned your head from the cup of heaven? Spread 
your wings and fly upward, you, who have a knowledge of 
the truth. If not, you will always be ashamed when you hear 
the sound of the cup. 


32 

QUESTION OF THE SIXTEENTH BIRD 

Another bird asked the Hoopoe: ‘O you who are our 
leader, is boldness permitted in approaching the Majesty of 
the Simurgh? It seems to me that he who has courage is 
freed from many fears. Since you are such, scatter pearls of 
wisdom and tell us the secret.’ 

‘Everyone who is worthy,’ replied the Hoopoe, ‘is the 
Mahram of the secret of divinity, and it is good to be bold 
if one has intelligence of the secrets of God. But how can 
one who possesses the secrets impart them to another? Can 
a camel-driver of the desert be the confidant of a king? Still, 
if one is actuated by pure love a little boldness is permitted. 
He who is on the path of self-knowledge should know when 
to be bold, and not let himself die from lack of effort. 

‘A true dervish will be bold and confident from the true 
hope he experiences. He who is fearless from love sees the 


(8i) 

Lord in all. His boldness then is good and laudable, because 
he is an idiot of love, on fire.’ 


AN IDIOT OF GOD AND THE SLAVES OF AMID 

Khorassan was in a state of prosperity because of the wise 
rule of Prince Amid. He was attended by a hundred Turkish 
slaves whose countenances shone like the full moon, their 
bodies were slender cypresses, their legs as silver, and their 
breath was musk. They wore ear-rings of pearl whose reflec- 
tion lighted up the night and made it seem as day; their 
turbans were of the finest brocade, and round their necks 
were collars of gold; their breasts were covered with silver 
cloth, and their belts enriched with precious stones. All were 
mounted on white horses. Whoever looked at one of them 
lost his heart at once. By chance, a Sufi, clothed in rags and 
baiefoot, saw this body of young men in the distance, and 
asked: ‘What is this cavalcade of houris?’ He was told, 
‘These young men are the pages of Amid, the prince of this 
city.’ WTen the idiot of God heard this, the vapour of folly 
went to his head and he cried: ‘O God, the possessor of the 
glorious canopy, teach Amid to take care of his servants.’ 

If you are like this idiot, have also his boldness; lift your- 
self up like a slender tree; but if you have no leaves do not 
be daring and do not jest. The daring of the fools of God is 
a good thing. They cannot tell if the way is good or bad, 
they only know how to act. 


A HOLY FOOL 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘An idiot of God went naked and 
starving along the road in winter. With neither house nor 
shelter he was soaked with rain and sleet. At last he came to 
a ruined palace and decided to take refuge there, but as he 
went in at the doorway a tile fell on his head and cracked his 


(82) 

skull, so that the blood flowed. He turned his face to heaven 
and said : “ Wouldn’t it be better to beat the royal drum than 
to drop a tile on my head?”’ 

PRAYER OF A MADMAN 

There was a famine in Egypt, so dreadful that everywhere 
people were dying as they begged for bread. By chance a 
madman passed along and seeing how many were perishing 
of starvation he said to God: ‘O you who possess the good 
things of the world and of religion, since you cannot feed 
all men, create fewer.’ 

If one who would be bold in the court should say some- 
thing unbecoming, he must humbly ask for forgiveness. 

ANOTHER FOOL 

A Sufi, an idiot of God, was tormented by children who 
threw stones at him. At last he took refuge in a corner of a 
building. But at that moment it began to hail and the hail- 
stones came through an open skylight and fell on his head. 
The man took the hail for pebbles and began to stretch out 
his tongue and insult the children, whom he imagined were 
throwing them, for the house was dark. At length he dis- 
covered that the pebbles were only hailstones, and he was 
sorry and prayed: ‘O God, it was because the house was dark 
that I have sinned with my tongue.’ 

If you understand the motives of those who are in dark- 
ness, you will, no doubt, forgive them. 


33 

THE SEVENTEENTH BIRD QUESTIONS THE HOOPOE 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe : ‘As long as I live the love 
of the Eternal Being will be dear and agreeable to me, and 
I shall never cease to think of him. I have been about with 


( 83 ) 

all living creatures and far from being attached to them I 
am identified with none. The folly of love occupies all my 
thoughts, so for me, love is enough. But such love is not 
expedient for everyone, and now the time has come when I 
must draw a line on my life so that I shall be able to take a 
cup of wine from my beloved; then the eye of my heart will 
be rendered luminous by his beauty, and my hand will touch 
his neck as a pledge of the union.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘It is not by these pretentious boast- 
ings that one can become an honoured guest of the Simurgh 
of the Caucasus. Do not extol so much the love that you 
believe you feel for him, for it is not given to everyone to 
possess it. It is necessary that the wind of good fortune 
should lift the veil of the mystery, then the Simurgh will 
draw you to him and you shall sit with him in his harem. If 
you wish to come to the sacred place you must first of all 
strive to have a knowledge of spiritual things, otherwise 
your love for the Simurgh will be turned to torment. For 
your true felicity it is necessary that the Simurgh shall also 
love you.’ 


DREAM OF A DISCIPLE OF BAYAZID 

When Bayazid departed from the palace of this world a 
disciple saw him the same night in a dream and asked this 
excellent pir how he had escaped Munkir and Nakir. The 
Sufi said to him: ‘ When these two angels questioned me about 
the Creator, I said to them, “The question cannot be 
answered precisely, for if I say ‘he is my God, and that is 
all’, this will only express a desire on my part; it will be 
better if you return to God and ask him what he thinks of 
me. If he calls me his servant, you will know that it is so. If 
not, then he abandons me to the bonds which hold me. 
Since it is not easy to obtain union with God, what will it 
serve me to call him My Lord? If he does not agree to my 


( 84 ) 

service how can I claim him for my master? It is true that 
I have bowed my head, but it is also necessary that he calls 
me his slave.”’ 


MAHMUD IN THE HOT-ROOM OF THE HAMMAM 

One night, Mahmud, being in a state of dejection, went in 
disguise to the hammam. A young attendant welcomed him 
and made the necessary arrangements for him to sweat 
comfortably over the hot coals. Afterwards he gave the 
Sultan some dry bread, which he ate. Then The Sultan said 
to himself: ‘If this attendant had excused himself from 
receiving me I would have had his head cut off.’ At last the 
Sultan told the young man that he wished to return to his 
palace. The young man said: ‘You have eaten my food, 
you have known my bed, and you have been my guest. I 
shall always be glad to receive you. Though in reality we 
are made of the same substance, how, in regard to outer 
things, can you be compared to one in my lowly position?’ 
The Sultan was so pleased with this answer that he went 
seven times more as the guest of the attendant. On the last 
occasion he told him to make a request. ‘If I, a beggar, 
should make a request,’ the attendant said, ‘the Sultan will 
not grant it.’ ‘Ask what you will,’ said the Sultan, ‘even if it 
be to leave the hammam and become a king.’ ‘My only 
request,’ said he, ‘is that the Sultan shall continue to be my 
guest. To be a bath attendant sitting near you in a hot room 
is better than to be a king in a garden without you. Since 
good fortune has come to me because of the hot-room, it 
would be ungrateful of me to leave it. Your presence has 
lighted up this place ; what can I ask for better than yourself? ’ 
If you love God seek also to be loved by him. But while 
one man seeks this love, ever old and ever new, another 
desires two obols of silver from the treasure of the world; 
he seeks a drop of water when he might have the ocean. 


( 85 ) 

THE TWO WATER-CARRIERS 

A water-carrier, meeting another, asked him for some of 
his water. The latter said: ‘O you who are ignorant of 
spiritual things, why don’t you drink your own?’ The first 
said : ' Give me some of your water, you who have spiritual 
knowledge, for I am sick of my own.’ 

Adam was satiated with familiar things, and that is why 
he brought himself to take the wheat, a new thing for him. 
He sold the old things for a little wheat. He became one- 
eyed. Love came and knocked at the door for him. When he 
was completely destroyed in the lightning of love, both old 
and new things disappeared and nothing was left! But it is 
'not given to everyone to be disgusted with himself and to 
die completely to his old life. 


34 

SPEECH OF THE EIGHTEENTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘I believe that I have 
acquired for myself all the perfection that is possible, and 
I have acquired it by painful austerities. Since I have obtained 
here the result that I wish, it is difficult for me to set out for 
this place you speak of. Have you ever known anyone leave 
a treasure to go painfully wandering over the mountains, in 
the wilderness, and across the plains?’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘O diabolical creature, full of con- 
ceit and self-pride! You who are sunk in egoism! You who 
have such an aversion to doing! You have been seduced by 
your imagination and you are now far from divine things. 
The body of desire has the upper hand of your spirit; the 
devil has stolen your brain. Pride has taken possession of 
you. The light you think you have in the Spiritual Way is 
only a flickering flame. Your taste for heavenly things is 


( 86 ) 

imaginary. Do not let yourself be seduced by the glimmer 
which you see. So long as your body of desire confronts you, 
be aware of yourself. You must fight this enemy, sword in 
hand. When a false light shows itself from your body of 
desire you must look on it as the sting of a scorpion, for 
which you must use parsley. Do not despair because of the 
obscurity of the way which I shall show you, and because 
the light that you will see there will give you no pretension 
to be a companion of the sun. So long as you continue 
to live, O my dear, in the pride of life, your readings of 
books and your puny efforts are not worth an obol. Only 
when you give up this pride and vanity will you be able 
to leave this exterior life without regret. So long as you 
hold on to conceit and self-pride and the things of outer 
life, a hundred arrows of vexation will pierce you from 
every side.’ 


SHAIKH ABU BEKR OF NISHAPUR 

The shaikh went out one day from his monastery in the 
company of his disciples, riding on his donkey while his 
companions followed walking. All at once the donkey broke 
wind with a loud noise, whereupon the shaikh gave a cry 
and tore his khirka. His disciples looked at him in surprise, 
and one of them asked him why he acted like this. He said : 
‘ When I looked round and saw the number of my followers 
I thought to myself, ‘‘Now am I really equal to Bayazid. 
Today, I am accompanied by many earnest disciples; so, 
tomorrow, I shall without doubt ride with glor)" and honour 
over the plain of the resurrection.”’ He added, Ht was then, 
when I presumed this to be my destiny, that my donkey 
made that seemingly incongruous noise you heard. By this 
he wished to say, “Here is the reply that an ass makes to 
him who has such pretensions, and thoughts so vain ! ” That 
is why the fire of repentance fell so suddenly on my soul. 


( 87 ) 

and why my attitude has changed, and my imaginary posi- 
tion has fallen to pieces.’ 

O you who change with every moment, you are as 
Pharaoh to the roots of your hair. But if you destroy in 
yourself the ego for a single day, your darkness will be 
lighted up. Never say the word ‘I’. You, because of your 
‘I’s’, are fallen into a hundred evils, and you will always be 
tempted of the devil. 


GOD SPEAKS TO MOSES 

God one day said to Moses in secret: ‘Go and get a word of 
advice from Satan.’ So Moses went to visit Iblis and when 
he came to him asked him for a word of advice. ‘Always 
remember,’ said Iblis, ‘this simple axiom: never say “I”, so 
that you never may become like me.’ 

So long as there remains in you a little of self-love you 
will partake of infidelity. Indolence is a barrier to the 
spiritual way; but if you succeed in crossing this barrier a 
hundred ‘I’s’ will break their heads in a moment. 

Everyone sees your vanity and self-pride, your resentment, 
envy, and anger, but you yourself do not see them. There is 
a corner of your being full of dragons, and by negligence 
you are delivered up to them; and you pet them and cherish 
them night and day. So, if you are aware of your inner state, 
why do you remain so listless! 


THE DERVISH WHO POSSESSED A BEAUTIFUL 
BEARD 

In the time of Moses there was a dervish who spent days 
and nights in a state of adoration, yet experienced no feeling 
for spiritual things. He had a beautiful long beard, and 
often while praying would stop to comb it. One day, seeing 
Moses, he went to him and said : ‘O Pasha of Mount Sinai, 


( 88 ) 

ask God, I pray you, to tell me why I experience neither 
spiritual satisfaction nor ecstasy.’ 

The next time Moses went up on Sinai he spoke to God 
about the dervish, and God said, in a tone of displeasure: 
‘Although this dervish has sought union with me, neverthe- 
less he is constantly thinking about his long beard.’ When 
Moses came down he told the Sufi what God had said. The 
Sufi thereupon began tearing out his beard, weeping 
bitterly. Gabriel then came along to Moses and said : ‘ Even 
now your Sufi is thinking about his beard. He thought of 
nothing else while praying, and is even more attached to it 
while he is tearing it out!’ 

O you who think you have ceased to be pre-occupied 
with your beard, you are plunged in an ocean of affliction. 
When you can regard it with detachment you will have a 
right to sail across this ocean. But if you plunge in with 
your beard you will have difficulty in getting out. 


ANOTHER ANECDOTE OF A MAN WITH 
A LONG BEARD 

A sot, who had a fine long beard, accidentally fell into deep 
water. A passer-by seeing this, called out: ‘Throw away the 
wallet from your head.’ The drowning man replied, ‘This 
is not a wallet, it is my beard, and it is not this which cramps 
me.’ The passer-by said, ‘Anyway, let go of it, or you will 
drown.’ 

O you who are like goats, and have no shame of your 
beards, so long as you have a body of desire and a demon to 
truss you up, the pride of Pharaoh and Haman will be your 
portion. Turn your back on the world as Moses did and then 
you will be able to seize this Pharaoh by the beard and hold 
him firm. He who travels on the path of self-striving must 
regard his heart only as shish kabab. The man with the 
watering-pot does not wait for the rain to fall. 


35 

THE QUERY OF THE NINETEENTH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘Tell me, you who are 
celebrated throughout the world, what must I do to be 
contented on this journey? If you tell me, my mind will be 
easier, and I shall be willing to be led in this enterprise. In 
fact, direction is necessary, so that one does not become 
apprehensive. Since I only wish to accept the direction of the 
invisible world I repel, with good reason, the false direction 
of earthly creatures.’ 

‘As long as you live,’ replied the Hoopoe, ‘be content to 
remember God, and be on the watch against indiscreet talk. 
If you can do this the cares and sorrows of your soul will 
vanish. Live in God in contentment; turn like the dome of 
heaven for love of him. If you know of anything better, tell 
it, O poor bird, so that you may be happy for at least a 
moment.’ 


ANECDOTE OF A FRIEND OF GOD 

A friend of God who was dying began to weep and those 
with him asked why. ‘ I weep as the spring clouds,’ he said, 
‘because the time has come when I should die and I am 
disturbed. Seeing that my heart is already with God how 
can I die?’ One of those present said: ‘Since your heart is 
with God you will die a good death.’ The Sufi replied, ‘ How 
can death come to him who is united to God! As I am 
already with him, my death appears to be impossible.’ 

He who is content to exist as a particle of the great whole 
loses his egoism and becomes free. Be in contentment with 
your friend, like the rose in the calyx. 

ALLEGORICAL ANECDOTE 

A perfected man said: ‘For seventy years I have worked on 
myself and I am now in ecstasy, contentment, and felicity, 
G 


( 9 °) 

and in this state I participate in the Sovereign Majesty and 
am united with Divinity itself. As for you, while you are 
occupied with looking for the faults of others, how will 
you be able to taste the joy of the unseen world? If you 
look for faults with a searching eye, how will you be able 
to see the things of the inner world? You would split a hair 
for the faults of others, but to your own faults you turn a 
blind eye. Acknowledge your own faults, then, guilty 
though you be, God will have mercy on you.’ 

THE TWO DRUNKEN MEN 

A man who drank too much of that which is limpid, often 
came to the point when he lost both his senses and his self- 
respect. Once, a friend came across him in this deplorable 
state, lying on the road. So he got a sack and put him in 
feet first and put the sack on his shoulder and set off for 
home. On the way, another drunk appeared, reeling along, 
supported by a companion. At this, the man whose head 
hung out of the sack, woke up, and seeing the other in this 
pitiable state said reprovingly: ‘Ah, unhappy man, in future 
drink two cups of wine less, then you will be able to walk 
as I do now — free and alone.’ 

Our own state is not different. We see faults because we 
do not love. If we had the least understanding of real love, 
the faults of those near to us would appear as good qualities. 

THE LOVER AND HIS MISTRESS 

A young man, brave and impetuous as a lion, was for five 
years in love with a woman. In one of the eyes of this 
beauty was a small speck, but the man, when gazing on 
the beauty of his mistress, never saw it. How could a man, 
so much in love, notice a tiny flaw? However, in time, his 
love began to dwindle and he regained his power over him- 
self. It was then that he noticed the speck, and asked her 


(91 ) 

how it had come about. She said: ‘It appeared at the time 
when your love began to cool. When your love for me 
became defective my eye became so for you.’ 

O blind of heart! how long will you continue to look for 
the faults of others? Strive to be aware of those things you 
hide so carefully. When you see your faults in all their 
ugliness you will not bother so much about those of others. 

THE POLICEMAN AND THE DRUNKEN MAN 

A policeman knocked down a drunken man who said to 
him: ‘Why get into such a passion? You are doing some- 
thing illegal. I am harming no one, but you are mixing your- 
self up with drunkenness and throwing it into the road. You 
are much more drunk than I, but no one notices it. Then 
leave me alone, and ask for justice against yourself.’ 


36 

QUESTION OF THE TWENTIETH BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O Leader of the Way, 
what ought I to ask the Simurgh if I arrive at the place where 
he dwells? Since by him the world will be lighted up, I shall 
not know what to ask. If I knew what is the best thing to 
ask of the Simurgh on his throne, my mind would be easier.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘O Idiot! What! You don’t know 
what to ask? Ask that which you wish most. A man should 
know what he wishes to ask, though the Simurgh himself is 
far better than anything you can wish. Will you learn from 
him what you wish to ask?’ 

PRAYER OF SHAIKH RUBDAR 

When Bu Ali Rubdar was at the point of death he pro- 
nounced these words: ‘My soul is on my lips in expectation 
of eternal welfare. The doors of heaven are open, and they 


(90 

have placed a throne for me in paradise. The saints who 
dwell in the palace of immortality cry with the voices of 
nightingales: “Enter, O true lover. Be thankful and walk 
with joy, for no one on earth has ever seen this place.” O 
God, if I obtain thy grace and favour my soul will not slip 
from the hand of certainty. I shall not bow my head as in 
the world of men, for my soul has been formed through thy 
love, and thus I know neither heaven nor hell. 

‘If I am reduced to ashes there will not be found in me 
another being than Thou. I know Thee but I know not 
religion or unbelief. I am Thou, Thou art I. I desire Thee, 
my soul is in Thee. Thou alone art necessary to me. Thou 
art for me this world and the world to come. Satisfy, ever 
so little, the need of my wounded heart. Show, even a little, 
thy love for me, for I breathe only by Thee.’ 

WORDS OF GOD TO DAVID 

God from on High said to David: ‘Say to my servants: “O 
handful of earth ! If I had not heaven for recompense and 
hell for punishment, would you ever think of me? If there 
were neither light nor fire, would you ever think of me? 
But since I merit supreme respect you must adore me with- 
out hope or fear; and yet, if you were never upheld by hope 
or fear would you ever think of me? Since I am your Lord, 
you should worship me from the depths of your heart. Re- 
ject all that which is not I, burn it to ashes and cast the ashes 
to the wind of excellence.” ’ 

MAHMUD AND AYAZ 

One day, Mahmud called his favourite to him and gave him 
his crown and made him sit on his throne, and said to him: 
‘Ayaz, I give you my kingdom and my army. Reign, for 
this country is yours; and I now wish you to take my place 
and throw your ear-ring of slavery to the Moon and the 
Fish.’ 


( 93 ) 

When the officers and courtiers heard about it their eves 
went black from jealousy and they said: ‘Never in the world 
has a king given so much honour to a slave/ But Ay^ wept, 
and they said to him: ‘Have you lost your senses? You are 
no longer a slave but of the royalty. Why do you weep? Be 
contented!’ Ay^ replied: ‘You do not see things as they 
are, you do not understand that the Sultan of this great 
countty has exiled me from his presence. He wishes me to 
rule his kingdom, but I do not wish to be separated from 
him. I wish to obey him but not to leave him. What have I 
to do with government and royalty? My happiness is in 
seeing his face.’ 

Learn from Ayaz how to ser\^e God, you who remain idle 
day and night, occupied with cheap and \'ulgar pleasures. 
Ay^ descends from the summit of power, but you do not 
stir from where you are, neither have you any wish to 
change yourself. To whom will you at last be able to tell 
your sorrows ? So long as you depend on paradise and hell, 
how will you be able to understand the secret which I wish 
to reveal to you; but when you no longer depend on those 
t\^^o the dawn of the mystety will lift itself from the night. 
The garden of paradise moreover is not for the indifferent; 
and the empyrean is only for the men of heart. 

PRAYER OF RAbTaH 

‘O God, you who know the secret of all things, bring to 
pass the worldly desires of my enemies, and grant my friends 
the eternity of the future life. But as for me, I am free of both. 
Even if I possessed this present world or the world of the 
future, I should esteem them little in comparison with being 
near to you. I need only you. If I should turn my eyes to- 
wards the two worlds, or desire anything but you, I should 
be no more than an unbeliever.’ 


WORDS OF GOD TO DAVID 

The Creator of the World spoke to David from behind the 
veil of mystery. ‘All that exists, whether good or bad, visible 
or invisible, moving or unmoving, is only a substitute if it 
is not myself, for whom you will find neither replacement 
nor equal. Since nothing can take the place of me, do not 
separate yourself from me. I am necessary to you, you are 
dependent on me. Therefore do not desire that which offers 
itself if it be not L’ 

SULTAN MAHMUD AND THE IDOL OF SOMNAT 

Mahmud and his army discovered at Somnat an idol named 
Lat, which Mahmud decided to destroy. The Hindus, to save 
it, offered ten times its weight in gold, but Mahmud refused 
and ordered a great fire to be made to burn the idol. Then 
one of his officers permitted himself to say: ‘Would it not 
be better. Sire, to accept the gold and not to burn the idol?’ 
‘I should think,’ said Mahmud, ‘that on the day of supreme 
reckoning the Creator would say to the assembled universe : 
“Listen to what Azaz and Mahmud have done — the first 
fashioned idols, the second sold them!”’ 

They say that when the idol of the fire-worshippers was 
burning a hundred maunds of precious stones fell out, so 
Mahmud obtained treasure as well. He said: ‘Lat has got 
what he deserved and God has rcwaraed me.’ 

ANOTHER ANECDOTE OF MAHMUD 

When this torch of kings left Gazna to make war on the 
Hindus and encountered their mighty army, he was cast 
down, and he made a vow to the King of Justice that if he 
were victorious he would give all the booty that fell into 
his hands to the dervdshes. He gained the victory, and his 
army collected an enormous amount of treasure. When the 
black-faces had retreated leaving the plunder, Mahmud said : 


(95 ) 

‘ Send this to the dervishes, for I have promised God to do 
so, and I must keep my vow.’ Then his officers protested 
and said: ‘Why give so much silver and gold to a handful 
of men who do not fight! Why not give it to the army which 
has borne the brunt of the battle, or, at least, put it in the 
treasury?’ 

The Sultan hesitated between his vow and the protests 
of his army. Meanwhile, Bu Hassein, an idiot of God, who 
was intelligent but uneducated, passed along that way. 
Mahmud seeing him in the distance said: ‘Call that idiot; 
tell him to come here and say what ought to be done, and I 
will act accordingly; since he fears neither the Sultan nor 
the army he will give an impartial opinion.’ When the 
Sultan had put the case to Bu Hassein, the latter said: ‘Sire, 
it is a question of two obols, but if you wish to act becomingly 
towards God, think no more, O my dear, about these two 
obols; and if you win another victory by his grace, be 
ashamed to hold back two obols. Since God has given you 
the victory, can that which belongs to God belong to you?’ 

Mahmud thereupon gave the treasure to the dervishes, 
and became a great monarch. 


37 

QUESTION OF THE TWENTY-FIRST BIRD 

Another bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘Tell us, O you who wish 
to lead us to the unknown Majesty, what is most appreciated 
at that court? It is necessary when going to kings to bear 
precious gifts; only vile men approach them with empty 
hands.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘If you follow my advice you will 
take to the country of the Simurgh what is not found there. 
Is it fitting that one should take what is there already? True 
knowledge is found there, secrets are found there, obedience 


to higher beings is found there. Take then the ardour of 
love and the longing of the spirit; no one can offer other 
than this. If a single sigh of love goes to that place it will 
carry the perfume of the heart. That place is consecrated to 
the essence of the soul. If a man should heave one sigh of 
true contrition he will forthwith be in possession of 
salvation.’ 

JOSEPH AND 2ULAIKHA 

At the time when Zulaikha was enjoying her high rank and 
dignity she had Joseph put in prison, and told one of her 
slaves to give him fifty blows with a stick. ‘ Strike him hard,’ 
she said, ‘so that I shall be able to hear his cries.’ But this 
good man did not wish to hurt Joseph, so he took the skin 
of an animal, and said: ‘When I beat it, cry out at each 
stroke.’ When Zulaikha heard the cries she went to the cell 
and said: ‘You are too easy with him, strike harder.’ Then 
the slave said to Joseph, ‘O radiance of the sun! If Zulaikha 
examines you and does not see any marks, she will punish 
me severely. Now, uncover your shoulders and brace up 
your heart and bear the blows. If you cry out from the blows 
she will take less notice of the marks.’ Joseph uncovered his 
shoulders, the stick fell, and his cries went up to heaven. 
When Zulaikha heard him she went and said: ‘It is enough, 
these cries have produced their effect. Before, his groans 
were nothing; now, they are very real.’ 

THE SHAIKH BEN ALI TUCI 

Ben Ali Tuci, one of the great sages of his time, walked in 
the valley of awareness and attention. I do not know of any- 
one who possessed such grace and who attained such per- 
fection. He once said : ‘ In the other world, the unfortunate 
damned will see clearly the dwellers in heaven, who will be 
able to tell them about the joys of that place and the taste of 
union. The fortunate will say: “Vulgar joys do not exist here, 
because the sun of divine beauty has appeared to us, and 


( 97 ) 

it is such that the eight paradises appear to be dark. In the 
brightness of this beauty there remains of eternity neither 
name nor trace!” Then those in the underworld will say: 
‘‘We sense that what you say is true, but for us in this 
horrible place it is evident that we have incurred the anger 
of God, and for this we have been put far from his face. We 
are reminded of the fire of the underworld by the fire of 
remorse in our hearts.” ’ 

Strive to bear sorrow, affliction and wounds, and thereby 
show your zeal. If 3^ou are wounded, accept it, and do not 
give way to self-pity. 

REQUEST TO MUHAMMAD 

A man humbly asked permission to say a prayer on the 
carpet of the Prophet, who refused, and said: ‘The earth 
and the sand are burning. Put your face on the burning sand 
and on the earth of the road, since all those who are wounded 
by love must have the imprint on their face, and the scar 
must be seen. Let the scar of the heart be seen, for by their 
scars are known the men who are in the way of love.’ 


38 

QUESTION OF THE TWENTY-SECOND BIRD AND 
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRST VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF THE QUEST 

This bird said to the Hoopoe: ‘O you who know the road 
of which you have told us and on which you wish us to 
accompany you, to me the way is dark, and in the gloom it 
appears to be very difficult, and many parasangs in length.’ 

The Hoopoe replied: ‘We have seven valleys to cross and 
only after we have crossed them shall we discover the 
Simurgh. No one has ever come back into the world who 


( 98 ) 

has made this journey, and it is impossible to say how many 
parasangs there are in front of us. Be patient, O fearful one, 
since all those who went by this road were in your state. 

‘The first valley is the Valley of the Quest, the second 
the Valley of Love, the third is the Valley of Understanding, 
the fourth is the Valley of Independence and Detachment, 
the fifth of Pure Unity, the sixth is the Valley of Astonish- 
ment, and the seventh is the Valley of Poverty and Nothing- 
ness beyond w’hich one can go no farther. 

‘When you enter the first valley, the Valley of the Quest, 
a hundred difficulties will assail you; you will undergo a 
hundred trials. There, the parrot of heaven is no more than 
a fly. You will have to spend several years there, you will 
have to make great efforts, and to change your state. You 
will have to give up all that has seemed precious to you and 
regard as nothing all that you possess. When you are sure 
that you possess nothing, you will still have to detach your- 
self from all that exists. Your heart will then be saved from 
perdition and you will see the pure light of Divine Majesty 
and your real wishes will be multiplied to infinity. One who 
enters here will be filled with such longing that he will give 
himself up completely to the quest symbolized by this valley. 
He will ask of his cup-bearer a draught of wine, and when he 
has drunk it nothing else will matter except the pursuit of 
his true aim. Then he will no longer fear the dragons, the 
guardians of the door, which seek to devour him. When the 
door is opened and he enters, then dogma, belief and 
unbelief — all cease to exist.’ 

EXTRACT FROM GANJ-NAMA THE BOOK OF 
TREASURE OF OSMAN AMRU 

When God breathed the pure breath of life into the body 
of Adam, which was only earth and water, he wished that 
the hosts of angels should not know about it, and not even 
suspect it. So he said to them: ‘Prostrate yourselves before 


C99; 

Adam, O Celesdal Spirits ! ’ All of them then bowed them- 
selves down on the earth, and when they were bowed down, 
God breathed the breath of life into Adam and none of them 
was aware of the secret that God wished to hide. That is, 
none but Iblis, who said to himself, ‘No one shall see me 
bend the knee. Even if my head falls from my body, it will 
not be as bad as doing what God wishes. I know very well 
that it is not just a question of Adam being on the earth, 
so I don’t intend to bow my head down and not see the 
secret.’ So instead of bowing down, Iblis watched, and saw 
the secret. Afterwards God said: ‘O you who w^ere lying 
in wait, you have stolen my secret, and for this I shall bring 
about your death, for I do not wish any other being to 
know about it. \^Tien an earthly king hides treasure he kills 
the person who saw it being hid. You are this person.’ 

‘Lord,’ said Iblis, ‘grant a respite, for I am your serv^ant; 
and tell me how I can expiate my sin?’ ‘Since you ask,’ said 
God, ‘I will grant you a respite; nevertheless, from this 
moment I shall put on your neck the collar of malediction 
and I impose on you the name of liar and slanderer, so that 
ever\"one will be on guard against you until the day of 
resurrection.’ 

Iblis said: ‘^Tiat have I to fear from your malediction 
since this pure treasure has been manifested to me? If male- 
diction comes from you so does mercy. Where there is 
poison there is also an antidote. You curse some creatures 
and bless others. Now that I have transgressed I am the 
creature of your malediction.’ 

If you cannot discover and understand the secret of which 
I speak, it is not because it does not exist but because you 
do not seek rightly. If you make a distinction between the 
things which come from God you are not a man on the path 
of the spirit. If you consider yourself honoured by the 
diamond and humiliated by the stone, God is not with you. 
Note well, you should not love the diamond and detest the 


( loo) 

stone, for both come from God. If your mistress in a 
moment of frenzy throws a stone at you, that is better than 
a jewel from another woman. 

On the way of self-perfection a man must not loiter for 
an instant. If he should stop for a moment working on him- 
self he will slip back. 


STORY OF MAJNUN 

A man who loved God saw Majnun sifting the earth of the 
road and said: ‘Majnun, what are you looking for?’ ‘I am 
looking for Laila,’ he said. The man asked: ‘Do you hope 
to find Laila there?’ ‘I look for her ever\nA^here,’ said 
Majnun, ‘in the hope of finding her somewhere.’ 


YUSSUF HAMDANI 

Yussuf Hamdani was a celebrated man of his time, a seer, 
who understood the secrets of the worlds. He said : ‘All that 
which is seen, either on the heights or in the depths — each 
atom in fact, is another Jacob asking for news of Joseph 
whom he has lost.’ 

In the spiritual way both love and hope are necessary. If you 
do not have these you had better give up the quest. Man 
must try to be patient. But is a lover ever patient? Be patient 
and strive with hope to find someone who will show you 
the way. Keep yourself within yourself and do not let 
exterior life capture you. 


STORY OF ABU SA’iD MAHNAH 

Shaikh Mahnah was in a state of great perplexity, his heart 
broken in two, when he saw in the distance an old villager 
of pious appearance, walking leisurely, while from his body 
emanated a bright light. The shaikh saluted him and then 


(lOl) 

told him about the sad state he was in. The old villager 
listened, and after thinking a little said: ‘O Bu Sa’id, if they 
were to fill with millet, not once but a hundred times, the 
space from lowest earth to the throne of God, and if a bird 
took one grain of millet in a thousand years, and then flew 
a hundred times round the world, even in all that time your 
soul would have no news of the celestial court and Bu Sa’id 
would still be far off.’ 

Great patience is necessary for those who suffer; but no 
one is patient. When the quest is diverted from the inner to 
the outer, even if it should extend over the universe, in the 
end it will be unsatisfying. He who is not engaged in the 
quest of the inner life is no more than an animal — what 
shall I say? He does not even exist, he is a non-entity, a form 
without a soul. 

MAHMUD AND THE SEEKER AFTER GOLD 

One night Mahmud, riding alone, saw a man sifting earth 
for gold; his head was bent and he had piled up here and 
there heaps of sifted dust. The sultan looked at him and then 
threw his bracelet among the heaps and rode off* like the 
wind. The following night Mahmud returned and found 
the man still sifting. ‘ What you found yesterday,’ said the 
sultan, ‘should be enough to pay the tribute of the world, 
and yet you still continue to sift! ’ The man replied: ‘I found 
the bracelet you threw down, and it is because I have found 
such a treasure that I must continue to search as long as I 
live.’ 

Be like this man and search until the door is opened to 
you. Your eyes will not be always shut; seek the door. 

A SENTENCE OF RABi’ah 

A man prayed: ‘O Lord, open a door that I may come to 
you.’ Rabi’ah, hearing him, said: ‘O idiot! is the door shut?’ 


39 

THE SECOND VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF LOVE 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘The next valley is The Valley of 
Love. To enter it one must be a flaming fire — what shall I 
say? A man must himself be fire. The face of the lover must 
be enflamed, burning and impetuous as fire. True love 
knows no after-thoughts; with love, good and evil cease 
to exist. 

‘But as for you, the heedless and the careless, this discourse 
will not touch you, your teeth will not even nibble at it. A 
loyal person stakes ready money, stakes his head even, to 
be united to his friend. Others content themselves with 
promising what they will do for you tomorrow. If he w^ho 
sets out on this way will not engage himself wholly and 
completely he will never be free from the sadness and melan- 
choly which weigh him down. Until the falcon reaches his 
aim he is agitated and distressed. If a fish is thrown on to the 
beach by the waves it struggles to get back into the water. 

‘In this valley, love is represented by fire, and reason by 
smoke. When love comes reason disappears. Reason cannot 
live with the folly of love; love has nothing to do with 
human reason. If you possessed inner sight, the atoms of 
the visible world would be manifested to you. But if you 
look at things with the eye of ordinary reason you will never 
understand how necessary it is to love. Only a man who has 
been tested and is free can feel this. He who undertakes tliis 
journey should have a thousand hearts so that he can sacrifice 
one at every moment.’ 

AN AMOROUS KHOJA 

A Khoja sold all that he possessed — furniture, slaves, and 
ever}"thing, to buy beer from a young beer-seller. He became 


(io3) 

completely mad for love of this beer-seller. He was always 
hungr}’ because if he were given bread he sold it to buy beer. 
At last someone asked him: ^What is this love that brings 
you into such a pitiable state? Tell me the secret!’ 'Love is 
such/ he replied, 'that you will sell the merchandise of a 
hundred worlds to buy beer. So long as you do not under- 
stand this, you will never experience the true feeling of love.’ 


A STORY OF MAJNUN 

The parents of Laila refused to let Majnun go near their tents. 
But Majnun, intoxicated with love, borrowed the skin of 
a sheep from a shepherd in the desert, where Laila’s tribe 
pitched their tents. He bent his head down and put on the 
sheep-skin, and said to the shepherd: 'In the name of God, 
let me crawl along in the middle of your sheep, then lead 
the flock past Laila’s tent, so that I may perhaps discover 
her sweet perfume, and being concealed in this skin may 
contrive something.’ The shepherd did as Majnun wished, 
and as they passed her tent he saw her, and swooned away. 
The shepherd then carried him from the tents into the 
desert and threw water on his face to cool his burning 
love. 

Another day, Majnun was with some companions in the 
desert, and one of them asked him: 'How can you, a noble- 
man, go about naked? I wdll get some clothes for you if you 
wish.’ Majnun said: 'No garments that I can wear are worthy 
of my friend, so for me there is nothing better than my bare 
body or a sheepskin. She, for me, is as ispand to avert the 
evil eye. Majnun would willingly wear garments of silk and 
cloth of gold, but he prefers this sheepskin by means of 
which he caught sight of Laila.’ 

Love should tear aside your prudence. Love changes 
your attitude. To love is to give up your ordinary life and 
forsake your tawdry pleasures. 


( 104 ) 

A BEGGAR IN LOVE WITH AYA2 

A poor dendsh once fell in love with Ayaz, and the news 
soon spread. When Ayaz rode through the street, perfumed 
with musk, this spiritual wanton would wait and run out to 
see him, and would stare at him as a polo player fixes his 
eye on the ball. At last they told Mahmud about this beggar 
being in love with Ayaz. One day, when Ayaz was riding 
with the sultan, the latter stopped and looked at this dervish 
and he saw that the soul of Ayaz was as a grain of barley and 
the face of the man as a ball of dough which encloses it. 

He saw that the back of the beggar was curved like a 
mallet, and his head was turning every way at once like the 
ball in polo. Mahmud said: ‘Miserable beggar, do you expect 
to drink from the same cup as the Sultan?’ ‘Although you 
call me a beggar,’ replied the dervish, ‘I am not inferior to 
you in the play of love. Love and poverty go together. You 
are the sovereign, and your heart is luminous ; but for love, 
a burning heart like mine is necessary. Your love is common- 
place. I suffer from the pain of absence. You are with the 
beloved; but in love one must know how to endure the 
pain of absence.’ The sultan said: ‘O you who have with- 
drawn from ordinary existence, love to you is as a game of 
polo?’ ‘It is,’ replied the beggar, ‘because the ball is always 
in movement, as I am, and I as the ball. The ball and I have 
heads that turn, though we have neither hands nor feet. We 
can speak together about the suffering that the mallet causes 
us; but the ball is happier than I, for the pony touches it from 
time to time with its feet. The ball receives the blows of the 
mallet on his body, but I feel them in my heart.’ 

‘Poor Dervish!’ said the sultan, ‘you boast of your 
poverty, but where is your evidence?’ 

‘If I sacrifice everything for love,’ replied the der^dsh, 
‘that is a token of my spiritual poverty. And if you, O 
Mahmud, ever have the experience of real love, sacrifice 
your life for it; if not you have no right to speak of love.’ 


( 105 ) 


So saying, he died, and the world became dark for 
Mahmud. 


AN ARAB IN PERSIA 

An Arab once went to Persia and was astonished at the 
customs of the country. One day he happened to pass the 
dwelling of a group of Qalandars and saw a handful of men 
who said not a word. They had no wives, and not even an 
obol, but they were pure of heart and undefiled. Each held 
a flask of muddy wine which he carefully filled before sitting 
down. The Arab felt sympathetic towards these men; he 
stopped and at that moment his mind and heart fell on to 
the road. 

At this the Qalandars said: ‘Enter, O man of nothing!’ 
So he went in, willy-nilly, just like that! He was given a cup 
of wine and at once lost his senses. He became drunk and 
his strength was reduced to nothing. His gold and silver and 
valuables were taken from him by one of the Qalandars, 
more wine was given to him and at last they put him out of 
the house. Then this Arab returned to his own countr}", one- 
eyed and poor, his state changed and his lips dry. When he 
arrived at his native place his companions asked him: ‘What 
is the matter? What have you done with your money and 
valuables? Were they stolen while you slept? Have you done 
badly in Persia? Tell us! Perhaps we can help you!’ 

‘I was moving about in the street,’ said he, ‘and all at 
once I fell in with the Qalandars. I know nothing else except 
that my possessions and I were parted and now I have 
nothing.’ They asked him to describe the Qalandars. He 
only replied, ‘They simply said to me “Enter” ’. 

The Arab remained ever after in a state of surprise and 
astonishment, like a child, and dumbfounded by the word 
‘Enter’. 

You too, put your foot forward. If you do not wish to, 
then follow your fantasies. But if you prefer the secrets of 

H 


(io6) 

the love of your soul you u^ill sacrifice everything. You will 
lose what you considered to be valuable, but you will soon 
hear the sacramental word ‘Enter’. 

THE LOVER WHO LOST HIS MISTRESS 

A man of high ideals fell in love with a beautiful young 
woman. But, as time went on, she to whom he had given his 
heart became thin, and as yellow as a sprig of saffron. The 
bright day faded from her heart; and death, who was watch- 
ing from far off, came near. When her lover learnt of this he 
took a dagger and said: ‘I will go and kill my mistress where 
she lies so that this beauty, who is like a wonderful picture, 
does not die by nature.’ They said to him: ‘Are you mad! 
Why do you wish to kill her when she is already at the point 
of death?’ The lover said: ‘If she dies at my hands they will 
kill me, since I am forbidden to do that myself. Then, on the 
day of resurrection, we shall be together as we are now. If 
I am put to death because of my passion for her we shall be 
as one, as the clear flame of a lighted candle.’ 

Lovers who have staked their lives for their love have 
entered on the Path. In the Life of the Spirit they are united 
to the object of their affection. 

ABRAHAM AND THE ANGEL OF DEATH 

When the friend of God came to die he was reluctant to 
deliver his soul to Azrael. ‘Wait,’ he said to Azrael. ‘Has the 
King of the Universe asked for it?’ But God, The Most 
High, said to Abraham : ‘ If you truly were my friend, would 
you not wish to come to me? He who regrets giving his life 
for his friend shall have it torn from him with a sword.’ 
Then, one of those present said : ‘O Abraham, Light of the 
World, why will you not give up your life with good grace 
to Azrael? Lovers in the Spiritual Way stake their lives for 
their love; you set store on yours.’ Abraham said: ‘How can 


( 107 ) 

I let go my life when Azrael has put his foot in the way? I 
disregarded his request because I thought only of God. 
When Nimrod cast me into the fire and Gabriel came to me, 
I disregarded him because I thought only of God. Seeing 
that I turned my head from Gabriel, can I be expected to 
give up my soul to Azrael? When I hear God say, “Give me 
your life!” then it will be worth no more than a grain of 
barley. How can I give my life to someone unless he asks 
for it? That is all I have to say.’ 


40 

THE THIRD VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF UNDERSTANDING 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘After the valley of which I have 
spoken, there comes another — The Valley of Understanding, 
which has neither beginning nor end. No way is equal to 
this way, and the distance to be travelled to cross it is beyond 
reckoning. 

‘Understanding, for each traveller, is enduring; but know- 
ledge is temporary. The soul, like the body, is in a state of 
progress or decline; and the Spiritual Way reveals itself only 
in the degree to which the traveller has overcome his faults 
and weaknesses, his sleep and his inertia, and each will 
approach nearer to his aim according to his effort. Even if 
a gnat were to fly with all its might could it equal the speed 
of the wind? There are different ways of crossing this Valley, 
and all birds do not fly alike. Understanding can be arrived 
at variously — some have found the Mihrab, others the idol. 
When the sun of understanding brightens this road each re- 
ceives light according to his merit and he finds the degree 
assigned to him in the understanding of truth. When the 
mystery of the essence of beings reveals itself clearly to him 


( io8) 

the furnace of this world becomes a garden of flowers. He 
who is striving will be able to see the almond in its hard 
shell. He will no longer be pre-occupied with himself, but 
will look up at the face of his friend. In each atom he will 
see the whole; he will ponder over thousands of bright 
secrets. 

‘ But, how many have lost their way in this search for one 
who has found the mysteries ! It is necessary to have a deep 
and lasting wish to become as we ought to be in order to 
cross this difficult valley. Once you have tasted the secrets 
you will have a real wish to understand them. But, whatever 
you may attain, never forget the words of the Koran, “Is 
there anything more?” 

‘As for you who are asleep (and I cannot commend you for 
this), why not put on mourning? You, who have not seen 
the beauty of your friend, get up and search ! How long will 
you stay as you are, like a donkey without a halter! ’ 

TEARS OF STONE 

There is a man in China who gathers stones, without ceasing. 
He sheds abundant tears, and as the tears fall on the ground 
they change into stones, which again he gathers. If the clouds 
were to weep tears Hke these it would be a matter for sorrow 
and sighing. 

Real knowledge becomes the possession of the true seeker. 
If it is necessary to seek knowledge in China, then go. But 
knowledge is distorted by the formal mind, it becomes petri- 
fied, Like stones. How long must real knowledge continue to 
be misunderstood? This world, this house of sorrows, is in 
darkness; but true knowledge is a jewel, it will burn like a 
lamp and guide you in this gloomy place. If you spurn this 
jewel you will ever be a prey to regret. If you lag behind you 
will weep bitter tears. But if you sleep little by night, and 
fast by day, you may find what you seek. Seek, then, and be 
lost in the quest. 


( 109 ) 

THE SLEEPING LOVER 

A lover, uneasy, troubled in his mind, and worn out with 
sighing, fell asleep on the mound of a grave. His mistress 
coming upon him and finding him asleep wrote a note and 
pinned it to his cloak. When he woke and read what she had 
written he groaned with anguish, for it said: 'O dumb man! 
rise up, and if you are a merchant, do business and get 
money; if you are an ascetic, wake at night and pray to God 
and be his slave. But if you are a lover, be ashamed of your- 
self. What has sleep to do with a lover’s eyes? By day he 
measures the wind; at night his burning heart lights up his 
face with the brightness of the moon. As you are no such 
man, no longer boast of loving me. If a man can sleep else- 
where than in his shroud I may call him a lover — but, of 
himself.’ 

THE SENTINEL IN LOVE 

A soldier was in love. Even if not on guard he could never 
rest. At last, a friend begged him to have a few hours’ sleep. 
The soldier said : ' I am a sentinel, and I am in love. How can 
I rest? A soldier on duty must not sleep, so it is an advantage 
to him to be in love. Each night love puts me to the test, and 
thus I can stay awake and keep watch on the fort. This love is 
a friend to the sentinel, for wakefulness becomes part of him ; 
he who reaches this state will ever be on the watch.’ 

Do not sleep, O man, if you are striving for knowledge of 
yourself. Guard well the fortress of your heart, for there are 
thieves everywhere. Do not let brigands steal the jewel you 
carry. True knowledge will come to him who can stay awake. 
He who patiently keeps watch will be aware when God comes 
near him. True lovers who wish to surrender themselves to 
the intoxication of love go apart together. He who has 
spiritual love holds in his hand the keys of the two worlds. If 
one is a woman one becomes a man; and if one is a man one 
becomes a deep ocean. 


( "o) 

MAHMUD AND THE IDIOT OF GOD 

One day, in the desert, Mahmud saw a faquir whose head 
was bowed in sadness and whose back was bent with sorrow. 
When the sultan went up to him the man said: ‘Begone! or 
I will give you a hundred blows. Go away, I tell you, you are 
no monarch but a man of vile thinking, an unbeliever in the 
grace of God.’ Mahmud answered sharply: ‘Speak to me as 
befits a sultan, not in that fashion.’ The faquir replied: 
‘If you knew, O ignorant one, how you are turned upside 
down, earth and ashes would not suffice ; you would lament 
without ceasing and put fire on your head.’ 


41 

THE FOURTH VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF 

INDEPENDENCE AND DETACHMENT 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘Then comes the valley where there 
is neither the desire to possess nor the wish to discover. In 
this state of the soul a cold wind blows, so violent- that in a 
moment it devastates an immense space: the seven oceans 
are no more than a pool, the seven planets a mere spark, the 
seven heavens a corpse, the seven hells broken ice. Then, an 
astonishing thing, beyond reason! An ant has the strength of 
a hundred elephants, and a hundred caravans perish while a 
rook is filling his crop. 

‘ In order that Adam might receive the celestial light, hosts 
of green-clad angels were consumed by sorrow. So that 
Noah might become a carpenter of God and build the ark, 
thousands of creatures perished in the waters. Myriads of 
gnats fell on the army of Abrahah so that that king would be 
overthrown. Thousands of the first-born died so that Moses 
might see God. Thousands of people took the Christian 


(Ill) 

girdle so that Christ could possess the secret of God. Thou- 
sands of hearts and souls were pillaged so that Muhammad 
might ascend for one night to heaven. In this Valley nothing 
old or new has value; you can act or not act. If you saw a 
whole world burning until hearts were only shish kabab, it 
would be only a dream compared to reality. If myriads of 
souls were to fall into this boundless ocean it would be as a 
drop of dew. If heaven and earth were to burst into minute 
particles it would be no more than a leaf falling from a tree; 
and if everything were to be annihilated, from the fish to the 
moon, would there be found in the depths of a pit the leg of 
a lame ant? If there remain no trace of either of men or jinn, 
the secret of a drop of water from which all has been formed 
is stiU to be pondered over.’ 


THE YOUNG MAN FALLEN INTO A PIT 

In my village there was a young man beautiful as Joseph, who 
fell into a pit and the earth caved in on him. When they got 
him out he was in a sad state. This excellent young man was 
called Muhammad, and was liked by ever}"one. His father 
groaned when he saw him and said : ‘ O Muhammad, you are 
the light of my eyes and the soul of your father. O my son, 
say one word to your father!’ The son said one word and 
gave up the ghost, and that is all. 

O you who are a young pupil on the path of spiritual 
knowledge and who are able to observe and ponder, think 
about Muhammad and Adam; think about Adam and the 
atoms, the whole and the particles of the whole; speak of the 
earth and heavens, of the mountains and the ocean ; speak of 
the fairies and the gods, of men and angels, of a hundred 
thousand pure souls; speak of the painful moment of the 
giving up of the soul; say that every individual, soul and 
body, are nothing. If you reduce the two worlds to dust and 
sift them a hundred times, what will it be for you? It will be 


( ” 2 ) 

like a palace upside down, and you will find nothing on the 
surface of the siftings. 

This Vallet is not so easy to cross as you in vour simplicity 
perhaps think. Even when the blood of your heart shall fill 
Ae ocean, you will only be able to make the first stage. Even 
if you were to journey over all the ways of the world you 
would still find yourself at the first step. No traveller has seen 
the limit of this journey neither has he found a remedy for 
love. If you halt you are petrified, or you may even die; if you 
continue on your way, always advancing, you will hear until 
eternity the cr\'; Go still further.’ You can neither go nor 
stay. It is no advantage either to live or to die. 

What profit have you derived from all that has befallen you ? 
What have you gained from the difficulties you have been able 
to endure? It matters little whether you beat your head or no. 
O you who hear me, remain silent, and work actively. 

Give up your useless aims and pursue the essential things. 
Be occupied as little as possible with things of the outer 
world but much with things of the inner world; then right 
action will overcome inaction. But those who find no remedy 
in acting, had better do nothing since you must know when 
to act and when to refrain from action. But how to know 
what you cannot know ? And yet it is possible to act as you 
should, even without knowing. Forget all that you have 
done up till now, and strive to be independent and sufficient 
in yourself, though sometimes you will weep and some- 
times rejoice. In this Fourth Valley the lightning of power, 
which is the discovery of your own resources, of self- 
sufficiency, blazes up so that the heat consumes a hundred 
worlds. Since hundreds of worlds are reduced to powder 
is it strange that yours also will disappear? 

the astrologer 

Have you ever seen a wise man set out a tablet and cover it 
with sand? There he traces figures and designs, and places 


(” 5 ) 

the stars and planets, the heavens and the earth. Sometimes 
he makes a prediction from the heavens, sometimes from 
earth. He also draws the constellations and the signs of the 
Zodiac and indicates the rising and setting of the stars, and 
from this he deduces good or bad auguries. When he has 
cast a horoscope, of good or bad fortune, he takes the tablet 
by a corner and scatters the sand, and it is as if all those signs 
and figures had never existed. 

The accidental surface of this world is like the tablet. If 
you have not the strength to resist the longing for the super- 
ficial things of this world turn away from it and sit in a 
corner. Men and women come into life without any idea of 
the inner and the outer worlds. 


THE FLY AND THE HONEY 

A fly in search of honey saw a beehive in a garden. The 
desire for honey put her into such a state that you would 
have taken her for an Azad, and she called out : ‘ I will give 
an obol to anyone who will help me get into this hive.’ 
Someone took pity on her, and for an obol helped her in. 
But no sooner was she in than her legs became stuck in the 
honey. Though she fluttered her wings and skipped about 
it became worse, and she moaned: ‘This is tyranny, this is 
poison. I am caught. I gave an obol to get in but would 
gladly give two to get out. ’ 

‘In this Valley,’ continued the Hoopoe, ‘no one must 
remain inactive, and one must enter it only after having 
reached a certain stage of development. Now it is time to 
work instead of living in uncertainty and passing one’s time 
heedlessly. Rouse yourself from apathy, renounce inner and 
outer attachments, and cross this difficult valley; for if you 
do not renounce them you will become more heedless than 
the worshippers of many gods, and you will never become 
self-sufficient,’ 


( ” 4 ) 

WORDS OF A SHAIKH TO A PUPIL 

A pupil demanded an answer from his master to ah idle 
question. The shaikh said: ‘First wash your face. Can the 
perfume of musk be smelled in the odour of putrefaction.^ 
I do not impart knowledge to drunken men. ’ 

A DERVISH IN LOVE WITH THE 

dog-keeper’s daughter 

There was once a celebrated shaikh who wore the khirka of 
poverty', but he fell deeply in love with the daughter of a 
man who looked after dogs, and in hope of seeing her lived 
and slept in the street. The girl’s mother discovered this, and 
said to the shaikh: ‘You know, of course, that we are dog- 
keepers, but since you have lost your heart to our daughter 
you may marry her in a year, and lodge with us; and you 
must consent to be a dog-keeper and accept our way of life.’ 
As the shaikh was no weakling in love he took off his Sufi 
mantle and set to work. Every day he took a dog into the 
bazaar, and continued to do so for almost a year. One day, 
another Sufi, who was also his friend, said to him: ‘O man 
of nothing, for thirtv^ years you have worked in, and pon- 
dered over, spiritual things, and now you do what your 
equals have never done!’ The shaikh replied: ‘You do not 
see things in their true light, so stop protesting. If you wish 
to understand, learn that God alone knows the secret and 
only he can reveal it. It is better to appear ridiculous than, 
like vou, never to have penetrated the secrets of the spiritual 
Way.’ 

42 

THE FIFTH VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF UNITY 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘You will next have to cross the 
Valley of Unity. In this valley eveiy'thing is broken in pieces 


(IIJ) 

and then unified. All who raise their heads here raise them 
from the same collar. Although you seem to see many beings, 
in reality there is only one — all make one which is complete 
in its unity. Again, that which you see as a unity is not 
different from that which appears as number. And as the 
Being of whom I speak is beyond unity and numbering, 
cease to think of eternity as before and after, and since these 
two eternities have vanished, cease to speak of them. When 
all that is visible is reduced to nothing, what is there left to 
contemplate?’ 


REPLY OF AN IDIOT OF GOD 

Someone asked a man of understanding: ‘What is the 
world? What can it be compared to?’ He replied: ‘This 
world, which is compounded of horrors and crime, is like a 
palm-tree of wax, adorned with a hundred colours. If you 
squee2e the tree it becomes a lump of wax; therefore the 
colours and shapes you admire are not worth an obol. If 
there is unity there cannot be duality; neither “I” nor 
“Thou” has significance. 

‘ But what is the use of my words, though they come from 
the depth of my soul, if you do not ponder over them. If you 
have fallen into the ocean of exterior life, like a partridge 
whose wings and feathers cannot support it, then never 
cease to think about how to reach the shore. ’ 

SHAIKH BU ALl DAKKAH 

An old woman offered Bu All a piece of gold saying: ‘Accept 
this from me.’ He replied: ‘I can accept things only from 
God.’ The old woman retorted: ‘Where did you learn to see 
double? You are not a man of power to bind and unbind. 
If you were not squint-eyed would you see several things at 
once?’ 

There is neither Ka’aba nor Pagoda. Learn from my 
mouth the true doctrine— the eternal existence of Being. We 


(ii6) 

must not see anyone other than Him. We are in Him, by 
Him, and with Him. We may also be outside these states. 
Whoever is not immersed in the Ocean of Unity is not 
worthy of the race of men. 

The day will come when the Sun will draw^ aside the 
veil which covers it. So long as you are separate, good 
and evil will arise in you, but when you lose yourself 
in the sun of the divine essence they will be transcended 
by love. While you loiter on the road you will be held 
back by faults and weaknesses. Have you not yet realized 
that in your body there are conceit, vanity, self-pride, self- 
love and other dirty things! Though the serpent and the 
scorpion may seem to be dead within you they are only 
asleep; and if something touches them they will wake up 
with the strength of a hundred dragons. In each of us is a 
Hell of serpents. If you make yourself secure against these 
unclean creatures you may remain tranquil; if not, they will 
sting you even in the dust of the tomb until the day of 
reckoning. 

And now, O Attar, leave your metaphorical discourses 
and return to the description of the mysterious Valley of 
Unity. 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘When the spiritual traveller 
enters this valley he will disappear and be lost to sight 
because the Unique Being will manifest himself; he will be 
silent because this Being wiU speak. 

‘The part will become the whole, or rather, there will be 
neither part nor whole. In the School of the Secret you will 
see thousands of men with intellectual knowledge, their lips 
parted in silence. What is intellectual knowledge here? It 
stops on the threshold of the door like a blind child. He who 
discovers something of this secret turns his face from the 
kingdom of the tu^o worlds. The Being I speak of does not 
exist separately; everyone is this Being, existence and non- 
existence is this Being. ’ 


( 117 ) 


PRAYER OF LOKMAN SARKHASl 

Lokman of SarkhasI said: 'O God, I am old, and my mind is 
troubled; I have strayed from the Way. To an old slave they 
give a certificate of freedom. In your service, O my King, 
my black hair has become white as snow. I am a slave, cast 
down; give me now the certificate of freedom.’ 

A voice from the inner world replied: ‘You, who have 
been specially admitted to the sanctuar}^, know that he who 
wishes for release from slavery must discard his reason, and 
not occupy himself with cares and anxieties.’ 

Lokman said: ‘O my God, I desire only you, and I know 
'that I must not give way to imagination or care and anxiety.’ 
When Lokman had renounced these things, he said: ‘Now 
I do not know what I am. I am not a slave, but what am I? 
My slavery is ended, but my freedom has not taken place : in 
my heart is neither joy nor sadness. I am without quality, 
yet I am not deprived of it. I am a contemplative, yet I do 
not possess contemplation. I do not know if Thou art I or 
I am Thou; I have been reduced to nothing in Thee and 
duality has been lost.’ 

A LOVER RESCUES HIS MISTRESS 
FROM THE WATER 

A young woman fell into a river, and her lover jumped in 
to save her. When he reached her she said : ‘ Oh, why do you 
risk your life because of me?’ He said, ‘For me there exists 
no other person than you. When we are together then truly I 
am you and you are me. We two are one. Our two bodies are 
one, and that is all.’ 

When duality disappears, unity is found. 

ANOTHER STORY OF MAHMUD AND AYAZ 

It is related that once Farouk and Masoud were present at 
a review of Mahmud’s army, which consisted of innumerable 


(ii8) 

elephants, horses and troops, so that the earth was as though 
covered with ants and locusts. Ayaz and Hassan accompanied 
Mahmud who was seated on a high place. 

As the immense army marched past them the great 
monarch unloosed his tongue and said to Ayaz: ‘My son, 
all these elephants and horses and men of mine are now 
yours, for my love for you is such that I look on you as 
king.’ Although these words were said by the renowned 
Mahmud, Ayaz appeared indifferent and unmoved; he 
neither thanked the king nor commented. Hassan, aston- 
ished, said to him: ‘Ayaz, a King has honoured you, a 
simple slave, and you show not the least sign of gratitude; 
you neither bow nor prostrate yourself in token of respect.’ 
Ayaz thought a little and then said: ‘I must give two 
answers to your reproach : the first is that if I, who have 
neither stability nor position, wish to show my devotion to 
the King, I can only fall in the dust before him in a sort of 
humiliation or else sing his praises in a whining voice. 
Between doing too much or too little it is better to do 
nothing. The slave is the King’s, and his respect for the 
King is taken for granted. As for the honour this fortunate 
monarch has done me, if the two worlds should proclaim 
his praises their testimony would not be equal to his merit. 
If I do not behave ostentatiously and protest my fidelity it 
is because I feel I am not worthy to do so.’ 

Hassan said: ‘O Ayaz, I see now that you are grateful, 
and I give you credit for being worthy of a hundred favours.’ 
Then he added, ‘Now give me the second answer.’ But 
Ayaz said, ‘ I cannot speak freely before you, I can only do 
so if I am alone with the King. You are not Mahram of the 
secret.’ So the king asked Hassan to leave them, and when 
there was neither ‘we’ nor ‘I’ Ayaz said: ‘When the King 
deigns to cast his eyes on me he annihilates my existence by 
the brightness of his rays. Since in the light of his glorious 


(" 9 ) 

sun I no longer exist, how shall I prostrate myself? Ayaz is 
his shadow, lost in the sun of his face.’ 


43 

THE SIXTH VALLEY 
THE VALLEY OF ASTONISHMENT 
AND BEWILDERMENT 

After the Valley of Unity comes the Valley of Astonishment 
and Bewilderment, where one is a prey to sadness and dejec- 
tion. There sighs are like swords, and each breath a bitter 
sigh; there, is sorrow and lamentation, and a burning eager- 
ness. It is at once day and night. There, is fire, yet a man is 
depressed and despondent. How, in his bewilderment, shall 
he continue his way? But he who has achieved unity forgets 
aU and forgets himself. If he is asked : ‘Are you, or are you 
not? Have you or have you not the feeling of existence? Are 
you in the middle or on the border? Are you mortal or 
immortal?’ he will reply with certainty: ‘I know nothing, I 
understand nothing, I am unaware of myself. I am in love, 
but with whom I do not know. My heart is at the same time 
both full and empty of love.’ 

THE PRINCESS IN LOVE WITH HER SLAVE 

A king, whose empire stretched to the far horizons, had a 
daughter as beautiful as the moon. Before her loveliness even 
the fairies were abashed. Her dimpled chin resembled the 
well of Joseph, and the locks of her hair wounded a hundred 
hearts. Her eyebrows were twin bows, and when she loosed 
their arrows the space between sang her praise. Her eyes, 
languorous as the narcissus, threw thorns of her eyelashes in 
the path of the wise. Her face was as the sun when he took 
the moon’s virginity. The Angel Gabriel could not tear his 
eyes from the pearls and rubies of her mouth. A smile of her 


( 120 ) 

lips dried up the water of life in the beholder, who yet begged 
alms from these same lips. Whoever glanced at her chin fell 
headlong into a spring of bubbling water. 

The king also had a slave, a youth, so handsome that the 
sun grew pale and the light of the moon diminished. When 
he walked in the streets and market-place crowds stopped to 
gaze at him. 

By chance one day the princess saw this slave, and in a 
moment her heart slipped from her hand. Reason forsook her 
and love took possession. Her soul, sweet as Shirin, turned 
bitter. Withdrawing from her companions she mused, and 
musing and reflecting, began to burn. Then she called her 
ten young maids of honour. They were excellent musicians 
and played on the shawms and pipes; their voices wxre those 
of nightingales, and their singing, which tore the soul, was 
worthy of David. Gathering them around her she told them 
about her state, saying that she was ready to sacrifice her 
name, her honour, and her life for the love of this youth; 
for when one is deep in love one is good for nothing else. 
‘But,’ she said, ‘if I tell him of my love no doubt he will do 
something rash. If it becomes known that I have been inti- 
mate with a slave both he and I will suffer. On the other 
hand, if he does not possess me, I shall die lamenting behind 
the curtain of the harem. I have read a hundred books on 
patience and still I am without it. What can I do! I must find 
a way to enjoy the love of this slender cypress, so that the 
desire of my body shall accord with the longing of my soul — 
and this must be done without his knowing.’ 

Then the sweet-voiced maids said: ‘Do not grieve. To- 
night we will bring him here unknown to anyone, and even 
he will know nothing about it.’ 

Soon, one of the young girls went in secret to the slave 
and asked him, as if to play with him, to bring two cups of 
wine. Into one cup she threw a drug, contriving that he 
should drink it. He at once fell asleep, so that she was able 


(I2I) 

to carry out her plan, and the youth of the silver breast 
remained without news of the two worlds. 

When night came the maids of honour went softly to 
where he lay and put him on a litter and carried him to the 
princess. Then they sat him on a golden throne and placed 
a coronet of pearls on his head. At midnight, still a little 
drugged, he opened his eyes and saw a palace as fair as 
paradise, and around him were golden seats. The place was 
lighted by ten great candles perfumed with amber, and 
sweet aloe wood burned in pans. The maidens began to 
sing, but in such sweet strains that reason bade farewell to 
the spirit, and the soul to the body. Then the sun of wine 
went round to the light of the candles. Bewildered with the 
joy of his surroundings and dazzled by the beauty of the 
princess, the youth lost his wits. He was no longer really 
in this world nor was he in the other. With a heart full of 
love, and a body possessed with desire, amid these delights he 
fell into a state of ecstasy. His eyes were fastened on her 
beauty and his ears to the sound of the reed pipes. His 
nostrils took in the perfume of amber and the wine in his 
mouth became like liquid fire. The princess kissed him, and 
he shed tears of joy while she mingled hers with his. Some- 
times she pressed sweet kisses on his mouth, sometimes they 
were tinged with salt; sometimes she ruffled his long hair, 
sometimes she lost herself in his eyes. He possessed her; and 
so they passed the time until the dawn appeared in the East. 
When morning Zephyr breathed the young slave became sad; 
but they sent him to sleep again and took him back to his 
quarters. 

When he of the silver breast came to himself, without 
knowing why, he began to weep. One might say the thing 
was finished, so what was the good of crying out. He tore his 
clothes, pulled his hair and put earth on his head. Those 
about him asked why he was doing this, and what had 
happened. He said: Ht is impossible to describe what I have 

I 


( 122 ) 

seen, no one else can ever see it except in a dream, for what 
has happened to me can never have happened to anyone 
before. Never was there a more astonishing mystery.’ 

Another said: ‘Wake up, and tell us at least one of the 
hundred things that happened.’ He replied: ‘lam in a tumult 
because what I have seen has happened to me in another 
body. While hearing nothing I have heard everything, while 
seeing nothing I have seen everything.’ 

Another said: ‘Have you lost your wits or have you just 
been dreaming?’ ‘Ah,’ he said, ‘I don’t know if I was drunk 
or sober. What can be more puzzling than something which 
is neither revealed nor hidden. What I have seen I can never 
forget, yet I have no idea where it happened. For one whole 
night I revelled with a beauty who is without equal. Who 
and what she is I do not know. Only love remains, and that 
is all. But God knows the truth.’ 

THE MOTHER AND HER DEAD DAUGHTER 

A passer-by, who saw a mother weeping over her daughter’s 
grave said: ‘This woman is superior to us men, for she 
knows whom she has lost and from whom she is parted. 
Happy the woman, or man, who knows w’hom he has lost, 
and for whom he weeps. As for me, though I sit in mourning 
and my tears flow like rain, I do not know for whom I weep. 
This woman carries away the ball of excellence from thou- 
sands like me, for she has found the perfume of the being she 
has lost.’- 

THE LOST KEY 

A Sufi heard a man cry out: ‘Has anyone found a key? My 
door is locked and I stand in the dust of the road. If my door 
stays shut what shall I do?’ 

The Sufi said to him: ‘Why do you worry? Since it is your 
door, stay near to it, even though it be shut. If you have 
patience to wait long enough no doubt someone will open 


( 123 ) 

it for you. Your situation is better than mine for I have 
neither door nor key. Would to God that I could find a 
door, open or shut.’ 

Man lives in a state of imagination, in a dream; no one 
sees things as they are. To him who says to you: ‘What shall 
I do?’ say to him: ‘Do not do as you have always done; 
do not act as you have always acted.’ He who enters the 
Valley of Astonishment has enough sorrow for a hundred 
worlds. For myself, I am bewildered and gone astray. 
Whither shall I direct my steps? Would to God I knew ! But, 
remember; the groans of men bring down mercy. 

THE PUPIL WHO SAW HIS TEACHER IN A DREAM 

A pupil one night saw his dead teacher in a dream and said 
to him: ‘Tell me what state you are in now. Since you went 
I have been lost in bewilderment, and burned up with grief.’ 

The pir replied: ‘I am in such a state of amazement that I 
can only bite the back of my hand. I am in the pit, dumb- 
founded; and I have had more of a shock than ever I 
experienced in life.’ 


44 

THE SEVENTH VALLEY 
OR 

THE VALLEY OF DEPRIVATION AND DEATH 

The Hoopoe continued: ‘Last of all comes the Valley of 
Deprivation and Death, which it is almost impossible to 
describe. The essence of this Valley is forgetfulness, dumb- 
ness, deafness and distraction; the thousand shadows which 
surround you disappear in a single ray of the celestial sun. 
When the ocean of immensity begins to heave, the pattern 
on its surface loses its form; and this pattern is no other 
than the world present and the world to come. Whoever 


( 124 ) 

declares that he does not exist acquires great merit. The drop 
that becomes part of this great ocean abides there for ever 
and in peace. In this calm sea, a man, at first, experiences only 
humiliation and overthrow; but when he emerges from this 
state he will understand it as creation, and many secrets will 
be revealed to him. 

‘Many beings have missed taking the first step and so have 
not been able to take the second — they can only be com- 
pared to minerals. When aloe wood and thorns are reduced 
to ashes they both look alike — but their quality is different. 
An impure object dropped into rose-water remains impure 
because of its innate qualities; but a pure object dropped in 
the ocean will lose its specific existence and will participate 
in the ocean and in its movement. In ceasing to exist separ- 
ately it retains its beauty. It exists and non-exists. How can 
this be? The mind cannot conceive it.’ 


THE ADVICE OF NASSIR UDDIN 

The beloved of Tus, that ocean of spiritual secrets, said to 
one of his disciples: ‘Melt yourself in the fire of love until 
you become as thin as a hair, then you will be fit to take 
your place among the locks of your beloved. If your eyes are 
turned towards the Way and if you are clear-seeing, then 
contemplate and ponder, hair by hair. 

‘He who leaves the world to follow this Way, finds death; 
he who finds death finds immortality. O my heart, if you 
have been turned inside out, cross the bridge Sirat and the 
burning fire; for when the oil in the lamp is burning it pro- 
duces smoke as black as an old crow, but when it has been 
consumed by fire it ceases to have a coarse existence. 

‘If you wish to arrive at that high place first get rid of 
yourself; then go out from nothing as another Borak. Put 
on the khirka of nothingness and drink of the cup of anni- 
hilation, then cover your breast with the belt of belittlement 


( 1 ^ 5 ) 

and put on your head the burnous of non-existence. Place 
your foot in the stirrup of non-attachment, and urge your 
useless steed towards the place where there is nothing. But 
if there remains in you the least egoism the seven seas will 
be, for you, full of adversity.’ 

STORY OF THE MOTHS 

One night, the moths met together tormented by a desire to 
be united to the candle. They said: ‘We must send someone 
who will bring us information about the obj ect of our amorous 
quest.’ So one of them set off and came to a castle, and in- 
side he saw the light of a candle. He returned, and according 
to his understanding, reported what he had seen. But the 
wise moth who presided over the gathering expressed the 
opinion that he understood nothing about the candle. So 
another moth went there. He touched the flame with the tip 
of his wings, but the heat drove him oflF. His report being 
no more satisfying than that of the first, a third went out. 
This one, intoxicated with love, threw himself on the flame; 
with his forelegs he took hold of the flame and united him- 
self joyously with her. He embraced her completely and his 
body became as red as fire. The wise moth, who was watch- 
ing from far off", saw that the flame and the moth appeared to 
be one, and he said: ‘He has learnt what he wished to know; 
but only he understands, and one can say no more.’ 

AN ILL-TREATED SUFI 

A Sufi was sauntering leisurely along when he was struck 
from behind. He turned round and said to the rogue who 
had hit him : ‘ He whom you struck has been dead more than 
thirty years.’ The rogue replied: ‘How can a dead man 
speak? Be ashamed, you are not united to God. If you are 
separated from him even by one hair it is as if you were a 
hundred worlds away.’ 


( i 26) 

When you are reduced to ashes, including your baggage, 
you will have not the least feeling of existence ; but if there 
remains to you, as to Jesus, only a simple needle, a hundred 
thieves will lie in wait for you on the road. Although Jesus 
had thrown down his baggage, the needle was still able to 
scratch his face. 

When existence disappears, neither riches nor empire, 
honours nor dignity, have any meaning. 

THE PRINCE AND THE BEGGAR 

There was once a king who had a son as charming as Joseph, 
full of grace and beauty. He was loved by ever)^one, and all 
who saw him would gladly have been the dust under his 
feet. If he went out at night, it was as if a new sun had risen 
over the desert. His eyes were the black narcissus, and when 
they glanced they set a world on fire. His smile scattered 
sugar, and wherever he walked a thousand roses bloomed, 
not waiting for the spring. 

Now there was a simple dervish who had lost his heart to 
this young prince. Day and night he sat near the prince’s 
palace, neither eating nor sleeping. His face became like 
yellow gold, and his e^^cs shed tears of silver, for his heart 
was cut in two. He would have died, but that from time to 
time he caught a glimpse of the young prince when he 
appeared in the bazaar. But how could such a prince com- 
fort a poor dervish in this state? Yet the simple man, who 
was a shadow, a particle of an atom, wished to take the 
radiant sun on his breast. 

One day when the prince was riding at the head of his 
attendants the dervish stood up and gave a cry and said: 
‘ My reason has left me, my heart is consumed, I no longer 
have patience or strength to suffer,’ and he beat his head on 
the ground in front of the prince. One of the courtiers 
wanted to have him killed, and went to the king. ‘Sire,’ 
he said, ‘a libertine has fallen in love with your son.’ The 


( 1 ^ 7 ) 

king was very angr)': ‘Have this audacious scoundrel im- 
paled/ he said. ‘Bind him hand and foot and put his head 
on a stake.’ The courtier went at once to do his bidding. 
They put a running noose on the neck of the beggar and 
dragged him to the stake. No one knew what it was about 
and no one interceded for him. When the wazir had had him 
brought under the gibbet, the dervish gave a cry of grief and 
said: ‘For the love of God, give me a respite, so that at least 
I can say a prayer under the gibbet.’ This was allowed, and 
the dervish prostrated himself and prayed : ‘ O God, since the 
king has given orders for my death — I, who am innocent — 
grant me, your ignorant servant, before I die, the good for- 
tune to see only once the face of this young man, so that I 
may offer myself as a sacrifice. O God, my King, you who 
give ear to a thousand prayers, grant this last wish of mine.’ 

No sooner had the dervish uttered this prayer than the 
arrow of his desire reached its mark. The wazir divined his 
secret and took pity on him. He went to the king and ex- 
plained the true state of things. At this the king became 
thoughtful; then compassion filled his heart and he pardoned 
the dervish, and said to the prince: ‘Go and fetch this poor 
man from under the gibbet. Be gentle with him and drink 
with him, for he has tasted of your poison. Take him to your 
garden and then bring him to me.’ 

The young prince, another Joseph, went at once — the sun 
with a face of fire came face to face with an atom. This 
ocean of beautiful pearls went to seek a drop of water. Beat 
your head for joy, set your feet dancing, clap your hands! 
But the dervish was in despair; his tears turned the dust to 
mud and the world became heavy with his sighs. Even the 
prince himself could not help but weep. When the dervdsh 
saw his tears he said: ‘O Prince, now you may take my life.’ 
And so saying, he gave up the ghost and died. When he 
knew that he was united to his beloved no other desires were 
left. 


(128) 

O you, who at once exist and are yet a non-entity, whose 
happiness is mingled with unhappiness, if you have never 
experienced unrest, how will you appreciate tranquillity? 
You stretch out your hand towards the lightning and are 
stopped by swept-up heaps of snow. Strive valiantly, burn 
reason, and give yourself up to folly. If you wish to use this 
alchemy reflect a little and, by my example, renounce your- 
self; withdraw from your wandering thoughts into your 
soul so that you may come to spiritual poverty. As for me, 
who am neither I nor not-I, I have strayed from myself, and 
I find no other remedy than despair. 

QUESTION OF A DISCIPLE TO HIS SHAIKH 

A man who was striving to overcome his weaknesses asked 
Nuri one day: ‘How shall I ever be able to arrive at union 
with God?’ Nuri replied: ‘For this you must cross seven 
oceans of light and seven of fire, and travel a very long road. 
When you have crossed these twice seven oceans, a fish will 
draw you to him, such a fish that when he breathes he draws 
into his breast the first and the last. This marvellous fish has 
neither head nor tail; he holds himself in the middle of the 
ocean, quiet and detached; he sweeps away the two worlds, 
and he draws to himself all creatures without exception.’ 


45 

ATTITUDE OF THE BIRDS 

When the birds had listened to this discourse of the Hoopoe 
their heads drooped down, and sorrow pierced their hearts. 
Now they understood how difficult it would be for a handful 
of dust like themselves to bend such a bow. So great was 
their agitation that numbers of them died then and there. 
But others, in spite of their distress, decided to set out on 
the long road. For years they travelled over mountains and 


( 129 ) 

valleys, and a great part of their life flowed past on this 
journey. But how is it possible to relate all that happened to 
them? It would be necessary to go with them and see their 
difficulties for oneself, and to follow the wanderings of this 
long road. Only then could one realize what the birds 
suffered. 

In the end, only a small number of all this great company 
arrived at that sublime place to which the Hoopoe had led 
them. Of the thousands of birds almost all had disappeared. 
Many had been lost in the ocean, others had perished on the 
summits of the high mountains, tortured by thirst; others had 
had their wings burnt and their hearts dried up by the fire 
of the sun; others were devoured by tigers and panthers; 
others died of fatigue in the deserts and in the wilderness, 
their lips parched and their bodies overcome by the heat; 
some went mad and killed each other for a grain of barley ; 
others, enfeebled by suffering and weariness, dropped on the 
road unable to go further; others, bewildered by the things 
they saw, stopped where they were, stupefied; and many, 
who had started out from curiosity or pleasure, perished 
without an idea of what they had set out to find. 

So then, out of all those thousands of birds, only thirty 
reached the end of the journey. And even these were be- 
wildered, wear}" and dejected, with neither feathers nor 
wings. But now they were at the door of this Majesty that 
cannot be described, whose essence is incomprehensible — 
that Being who is beyond human reason and knowledge. 
Then flashed the lightning of fulfilment, and a hundred 
worlds were consumed in a moment. They saw thousands 
of suns each more resplendent than the other, thousands of 
moons and stars all equally beautiful, and seeing all this they 
were amazed and agitated like a dancing atom of dust, and 
they cried out: ‘O Thou who art more radiant than the sun! 
Thou, who hast reduced the sun to an atom, how can we 
appear before Thee? Ah, why have we so uselessly endured 


( 13 °) 

all this suffering on the Way? Having renounced ourselves 
and all things, we now cannot obtain that for which we have 
striven. Here, it little matters whether we exist or not.’ 

Then the birds, who were so disheartened that they re- 
sembled a cock half-killed, sank into despair. A long time 
passed. When, at a propitious moment, the door suddenly 
opened, there stepped out a noble chamberlain, one of the 
courtiers of the Supreme Majesty. He looked them over and 
saw that out of thousands only these thirty birds were left. 

He said: ‘Now then, O Birds, where have you come 
from, and what are you doing here? What is your name? O 
you who are destitute of everything, where is your home? 
What do they call you in the world? What can be done with 
a feeble handful of dust like you?’ 

‘We have come,’ they said, ‘to acknowledge the Simurgh 
as our king. Through love and desire for him we have lost 
our reason and our peace of mind. Very long ago, when we 
started on this journey, we were thousands, and now only 
thirty of us have arrived at this sublime court. We cannot 
believe that the King will scOrn us after all the sufferings 
we have gone through. Ah, no! He cannot but look on us 
with the eye of benevolence ! ’ 

The Chamberlain replied: ‘O you whose minds and 
hearts are troubled, whether you exist or do not exist in the 
universe, the King has his being always and eternally. Thou- 
sands of worlds of creatures are no more than an ant at his 
gate. You bring nothing but moans and lamentations. 
Return then to whence you came, O vile handful of earth ! ’ 
At this, the birds were petrified with astonishment. Never- 
theless, when they came to themselves a little, they said: 
‘Will this great king reject us so ignominiously? And if he 
really has this attitude to us may he not change it to one of 
honour? Remember Majnun who said, “If all the people who 
dwell on earth wished to sing my praises, I would not 
accept them; I would rather have the insults of Laila. One 


( 131 ) 

of her insults is more to me than a hundred compliments 
from another woman ! ’’ ’ 

‘The lightning of his glory manifests itself/ said the 
Chamberlain, ‘and it lifts up the reason of all souls. What 
benefit is there if the soul be consumed by a hundred sor- 
rows? What benefit is there at this moment in either great- 
ness or littleness?’ 

The birds, on fire with love, said: ‘How can the moth 
save itself from the flame when it wishes to be one with the 
flame? The friend we seek will content us by allowing us to 
be united to him. If now we are refused, what is there left 
for us to do? We are like the moth who wished for union 
with the flame of the candle. They bfegged him not to sacri- 
fice himself so foolishly and for such an impossible aim, but 
he thanked them for their advice and told them that since his 
heart was given to the flame for ever, nothing else mattered.’ 

Then the Chamberlain, having tested them, opened the 
door; and as he drew aside a hundred curtains, one after the 
other, a new world beyond the veil was revealed. Now was 
the light of lights manifested, and all of them sat down on 
the masnad, the seat of the Majesty and Glor}^ They were 
given a writing which they were told to read through ; and 
reading this, and pondering, they were able to understand 
their state. When they w^ere completely at peace and de- 
tached from all things they became aware that the Simurgh 
was there with them, and a new life began for them in the 
Simurgh. All that they had done previously was washed 
away. The sun of majesty sent forth his rays, and in the 
reflection of each other’s faces these thirty birds (si-murgh) 
of the outer world, contemplated the face of the Simurgh 
of the inner world. This so astonished them that they did 
not know if they were still themselves or if they had be- 
come the Simurgh. At last, in a state of contemplation, they 
realized that they were the Simurgh and that the Simurgh 
was the thirty birds. W’hen they gazed at the Simurgh they 


( 132 ) 

saw that it was truly the Simurgh who was there, and when 
they turned their eyes towards themselves they saw that they 
themselves were the Simurgh. And perceiving both at once, 
themselves and Him, they realized that they and the Simurgh 
were one and the same being. No one in the world has ever 
heard of anything to equal it. 

Then they gave themselves up to meditation, and after a 
little they asked the Simurgh, without the use of tongues, to 
reveal to them the secret of the mystery of the unity and 
plurality of beings. The Simurgh, also without speaking, 
made this reply : ‘ The sun of my majesty is a mirror. He who 
sees himself therein sees his soul and his body, and sees them 
completely. Since you have come as thirty birds, si-murgh, 
you will see thirty birds in this mirror. If forty or fifty were 
to come, it would be the same. Although you are now com- 
pletely changed you see yourselves as you were before. 

‘Can the sight of an ant reach to the far-off Pleiades? And 
can this insect lift an anvil? Have you ever seen a gnat seize 
an elephant in its teeth? All that you have known, all that you 
have seen, all that you have said or heard — all this is no 
longer that. When you crossed the valleys of the Spiritual 
Way and when you performed good tasks, you did aU this 
by my action; and you were able to see the valleys of my 
essence and my perfections. You, who are only thirty birds, 
did well to be astonished, impatient and wondering. But I 
am more than thirty birds. I am the very essence of the 
true Simurgh. Annihilate then yourselves gloriously and 
joyfully in me, and in me you shall find yourselves.^ 

Thereupon, the birds at last lost themselves for ever in 
the Simurgh — the shadow was lost in the sun, and that is all. 

All that you have heard or seen or known is not even the 
beginning of what you must know, and since the ruined 
habitation of this world is not your place you must re- 
nounce it. Seek the trunk of the tree, and do not worry 
about whether the branches do or do not exist. 


( 133 ) 

IMMORTALITY AFTER ANNIHILATION 

When a hundred thousand generations had passed, the 
mortal birds surrendered themselves spontaneously to total 
annihilation. No man, neither young nor old, can speak 
fittingly of death or immortality. Even as these things are 
far from us so the description of them is beyond all explana- 
tion or definition. If my readers wish for an allegorical ex- 
planation of the immortality that follows annihilation, it will 
be necessar}' for me to write another book. So long as you 
are identified with the things of the world you will not set 
out on the Path, but when the world no longer binds you, 
you enter as in a dream; but, knowing the end, you see the 
benefit. A germ is nourished among a hundred cares and 
loves so that it may become an intelligent and acting being. 
It is instructed and given the necessary knowledge. Then 
death comes and evernhing is effaced, its dignity is thrown 
down. This that was a being has become the dust of the 
street. It has several times been annihilated; but in the mean- 
while it has been able to learn a hundred secrets of which 
previously it had not been aware, and in the end it receives 
immortalit}’, and is given honour in place of dishonour. Do 
you know what you possess ? Enter into yourself and reflect 
on this. So long as you do not realize your nothingness 
and so long as you do not renounce your self-pride, your 
vanity and your self-love, you will never reach the heights of 
immortality. On the \\ ay you are cast down in dishonour 
and raised in honour. 

And now my story is finished, I have nothing more to say. 





EPILOGUE 


O Attar! you have scattered on the world the contents of 
the vessel of the musk of secrets. The horizons of the world 
are full of your perfumes and lovers are disturbed because of 
you. Your verses are your seal; and they are known as 
Mantiq Uttair and Makamat Uttiyur. These conferences and 
talks and discourses of the birds are the stages of the way of 
bewilderment; or, one may say, they are the Diwan of 
Intoxication. 

Enter into this diwan with love. When the Duldul of your 
love gallops and you desire something, act in conformity 
with your desire. Love is the remedy for all ills, and it is the 
remedy of the soul in the two worlds. 

O you who have set out on the path of inner development, 
do not read my book only as a poetical work, or a book of 
magic, but read it with understanding; and for this a man 
must be hungry for something, dissatisfied with himself and 
this world. 

He who has not smelt the perfume of my discourse has 
not found the way of lovers. But he who will read it with 
care will become active, and will be worthy to enter the Way 
of which I speak. Those of the outer world will be like 
drowned men as regards my discourse; but men of the inner 
world will understand its secrets. My book is the ornament 
of its time; it is at once a gift for distinguished men and a 
boon for the common. If a man as cold as ice reads this book 
he will shoot forth as fire out of the veil which hides the 
mystery from him. My writings have an astonishing pecu- 
liarity — they give more profit according to the manner in 
which they are read. If you ponder over them often they will 
benefit you more each time. The veil of this wife of the harem 
will be drawn aside for you only gradually in the place of 


( 136 ) 

honour and grace. I have scattered pearls from the ocean of 
contemplation; I am thereby acquitted, and this, my book, is 
the proof. 

But if I praise myself too much, you may not approve; 
though he who is impartial will recognize my merit, for the 
light of my full moon is not hidden. If I am not remembered 
for myself I shall be remembered until the resurrection by 
the pearls of poetry that I have scattered on the heads of 
men. The cupolas of heaven will dissolve before this poem 
shall perish. 

Reader, if you experience some well-being through having 
read this poem with attention, remember the writer in your 
prayers. I have strewn here and there roses from the garden. 
Remember me well, O my friends ! Each teacher reveals his 
ideas in his own special way, and then he disappears. Like 
my predecessors I have revealed the bird of my soul to those 
who are asleep. Perhaps the sleep which fills your life has 
deprived you of this discourse ; but, having met it, your soul 
will be awakened by the secret which it reveals. 

And now my brain is smoked like a niche where stands a 
lamp. I have said to myself: ‘ O you who talk so much, instead 
of so much talking beat your head and search the secrets. 
What is the use of all these narrations to men corrupted with 
egoism. What can come out of hearts taken up with vanity 
and self-pride?’ 

If you wish the ocean of your soul to remain in a state of 
salutary movement you must die to all your old Life, and then 
keep silence. 


ATTAR 


Farid ud-Din Abu Hamid Muhammad ben Ibrahim was generally 
called Attar, the perfumer. Though little is known with certainty 
about his life, it seems that he was born in a.d. i i 20 near Nishapur 
in North-West Persia (the birthplace of Omar Khayyam). The 
date of his death is uncertain but is given as about a.d. 1230, so 
he lived to be a hundred and ten. Most of what is known about 
him is legendary, even his death at the hands of a soldier of 
Jenghis Khan. From his personal reminiscences scattered among 
his writings it seems that he spent thirteen years of his ^^outh in 
Meshed. According to Dawlatshah, Attar was sitting one day 
with a friend at the door of his shop when a dervish came by, 
who looked in, smelt the sweet perfumes, then heaved a sigh 
and wept. Attar thought he was trying to arouse their pity and 
asked him to go away. The dervish said: ‘Yes, there is nothing 
to prevent me leaving your door and saying farewell to this 
world. All I have is my worn-out khirka. But I grieve for you. 
Attar. How can you ever turn your mind to death and renounce 
all these worldly goods?’ Attar replied that he hoped to end his 
life in poverty and contentment as a dervish. ‘We shall see,’ said 
the dervish, and thereupon laydown and died. 

This made such an impression on Attar that he left his father’s 
shop, became a pupil of the famous shaikh Bukn-ud-din, and 
began to study, in theory and practice, the Sufi system of ideas. 
For thirty-nine years he travelled in many countries, studying in 
monasteries and collecting the writings of devout Sufis, together 
with legends and stories. He then returned to Nishapur where he 
lived for the remainder of his life. It was said that he had a deeper 
understanding of Sufi ideas than anyone of his time. He com- 
posed about two hundred thousand verses and many works in 
prose. He lived before Jalal-uddin Ruml. A Sufi being asked who 
of these two understood most, said: ‘Rumi flew up to the heights 
of perfection like an eagle in the twinkling of an eye; Attar 
reached the same place by creeping like an ant.’ Rumi said : ‘Attar 
is the soul itself.’ 

K 


( 138) 

Garcin cle Tassy relates that in 1862 Nicholas Khanikoff dis- 
covered a stone outside Nishapur, which had been erected some- 
time between 1469 and 1506 (some two hundred and fifty years 
after Attar’s death) on which was engraved an inscription in 
Persian. Tassy’s translation of this into French I render as follows: 

God is Eternal 
In the name of God 
The Compassionate the Merciful 

Here in this garden of a lower Eden, Attar perfumed the soul 
of the humblest of men. This is the tomb of a man so eminent 
that the dust stirred by his feet would have served as collyrium 
to the eye of the firmament; of the illustrious shaikh Attar Farid, 
of whom the saints were disciples ; of this excellent perfumer whose 
breath embalmed the world from one Kaf to another. In his shop, 
that nest of angels, the firmament is as a phial of pellets perfumed 
with citron. The earth of Nishapur will be renowned until the 
day of resurrection because of this illustrious man. The mine of 
his gold is found at Nishapur for he was born at Zarwand in the 
district of Gurgan. He lived at Nishapur for eighty-two years, of 
which thirty-two were passed in tranquillity. In the year of the 
Hijra 586 [1190] he was pursued by the sword of the army which 
devoured everything. Farid perished in the time of Hulaku Khan, 
being martyred in the massacre which then took place . . . May 
God, the Most High, refresh his soul! Increase, O Lord, his merit. 

The tombstone of this eminent man was placed here in the 
reign of the King of the World, His Majesty Sultan Abu Igazi 
Hussein . . . 

The rest of the inscription is in praise of the Sultan. There 
seems not to be any contemporary written record of how, when 
or where he died or was buried. 


A NOTE ON THE SUFIS 


The name is derived from suf, wool — woollen robes of ascetics. 
The Sufis follow the inner teaching of the Koran. Together with 
a system of ideas based on the precepts of their sacred book, they 
have a practical method for working on themselves, which is 
taught orally. By means of exercises, postures, and dances, the 
forces of man, which are continually being diverted away from 
himself, may be used and converted for inner development and 
the increasing of consciousness. The aim and end is union of the 
soul with God. There may be moments of foretaste of this — 
moments of revelation and ecstasy — ‘gifts’, as they are called, 
but perfection, union with God, must be worked for; there must 
be constant striving. 

There is one God. All things are in Him and He is in all things. 
All things, visible and invisible, are emanations of Him. Religions, 
in themselves, are not important, though they may serve to 
lead men to Reality. Good and Evil, as we understand them, do 
not really exist, for ever}'thing proceeds from the One Being, 
God; at the same time, there is real good and real evil, Man is 
not free in his actions; he has no free-will, though this may be 
achieved through striving in the right way. He is turned this way 
and that way by interior and exterior forces— the sport of evert’ 
wind that blows. Union is attained through two forms of renun- 
ciation and detachment: our own desires, vanities, day-dreams, 
on the one hand ; and the things of the world on the other — love 
of power, fame, riches and honours. But prayer and fasting also 
can be a great hindrance: one can become identified with any- 
thing. A Sufi, however, should not renounce necessaries and 
should not retire from the world. He must be in it but not of 
it. It is a great blessing to have what is necessary for the physical 
body. Sex in itself was not an occasion for sin, as it became in 
orthodox Christianity, but a prized possession. The meaning and 
use of the sex force was understood. As Orage points out in his 
essay ‘On Love’, ‘The chastity of the senses [in ancient times] 
was taught in early childhood. Eroticism thereby became an art 
in the highest form the world has seen. Its faint echoes are to be 
found in Persian and Sufi literature today.’ 


( 140 ) 

The soul (in the sense of that higher part of man which longs 
for perfection) existed before the body and is confined in it as 
in a cage. Human life is a journey which is made in stages; and 
the seeker after God a traveller, who must make great efforts to 
overcome his weaknesses and faults, and to obtain true know- 
ledge and understanding. 

Its followers say that Sufism has always existed under various 
names; and that the system and method, in different forms, was 
known to the Egyptians, Hindus, Buddhists, Jews, Greeks, and 
early Christians — in fact, to all of the great religions in their 
origins. It exists in the West today. 

Only the fellowship of those who have reached a certain state 
of development can set the traveller on the path. Provided he has 
the ableness for discipline and effort, a single day — even a single 
hour, in the society of men of understanding is of more value 
than years of asceticism and exterior forms of worship. 

Among the rules for pupils in the presence of a teacher are the 
following: ‘Pay attention and speak little. Don’t answer questions 
not addressed to you; but if asked, answer promptly, and don’t 
be ashamed to say “I don’t know”. Don’t dispute for the sake of 
disputation. Don’t boast before your elders. Don’t seek the 
highest place. Don’t be over-ceremonious. Obey all ordinary 
conventions, and conform to the wishes of others so long as 
they are not against your inner convictions. Don’t make a prac- 
tice of anything, except it is a religious duty or useful to others, 
since it may become an idol.’ 

The Sufis say that almost everyone is born with possibilities 
for inner development but that his parents and those around him 
make him a Jew, a Christian, a Hindu, or a Magician, and he 
soon acquires prejudices and accepts what others say with no 
regard to his own experience or reasoning, and this becomes a 
stumbling-block. When a ‘believer’ dies — one who has worked 
on himself — his soul goes to that heaven which corresponds to 
the state to which it has been perfected. But, however much 
‘knowledge’ a man has, unless he has examined himself, and 
confessed to himself that really he understands nothing, all that 
he has acquired will be as ‘ the wind in his hand ’. 


GLOSSARY 


ABRAHAM, IBRAHIM: One of the six great prophets. Nimrod 
had him thrown into a fiery furnace but he was rescued by the 
Angel Gabriel and the fire changed into a garden of roses. 
Nimrod made war on Abraham, but his army was defeated by 
swarms of gnats, one of which crept into Nimrod’s brain; he 
who wished to be Lord of all was punished by the smallest of 
creatures. 

abrahah: Also called Azaz and Thare. Father of Abraham. An 
idolater and fire-worshipper. 

ADAM: Muslims consider him to be the first prophet, the ^chosen 
of God’, Khalif of God on earth. The first man. According to 
Muslims, wheat was the forbidden food which Adam ate in 
Paradise. 

A last: The first word of a passage in the Koran, ‘Am I not 
your Lord?’ The words addressed to human souls contained in 
Adam, who replied ‘Yes’. 

angels: Are thought to be of a simple substance. Four are 
archangels: Gabriel, the angel of Revelations; Michael, the 
patron of the Israelites; Israfil, who will sound the trumpet on 
the last day; Azrael, the angel of death. Munkir and Nakir 
examine the dead in their graves. There are many others. 

ant: Guided Solomon across the desert. 

ark: Consisted of three stories — the lowest for beasts, the next 
for humans, the top for birds. 

beard: By Muslims regarded as the badge of dignity and man- 
hood. Hence: ‘By the beard of the Prophet.’ 

bird OF the soul: Joined the soul to the body, body to spirit. 

birds: Muslims believe that all kinds of birds (and many beasts) 
have a language by which they speak to each other. King 
Solomon was taught the language of the birds. 

bismillah: In the name of God. 


( M2) 

BORAK, buraq: The Bright One. The animal on which 
Muhummad made the journey at night, the Mi’raj. A white 
animal smaller than a horse, with wings. 

bridge: ‘Across the water’, for the Israelites over the Red Sea. 
cat: A cat woke Muhammad when it was time for prayer. Abu 
Qutadah said, ‘Cats are not impure, they keep w'atch round about 
us*. 

DANG: Quarter of a dinar. 

death: The Koran teaches that the hour of death is fixed for 
every' living creature. ‘If God were to punish men for their 
wrong-doing he would not leave a single human being on earth, 
but he gives them a respite; and when their time comes they can 
neither delay it for a single hour, nor can they hasten it.’ 
dervish: Persian, from ‘dar’, a door, so Darwesh. Begging 
from door to door. Arabic, faquir — the poor in spirit. TTiey 
follow the teachings of the Sufis. There are different orders of 
dervdshes. 

devil: Shaitan, the Opposer. Iblis, The Wicked One. Shaitan 
also denotes one who is far from the truth; and Iblis, one who 
is without hope. Muhammad said: ‘There is not one of you but 
has an angel and a devil appointed over him.’ The Companions 
asked: ‘Do you include yourself?’ He said: ‘Yes, for me also, 
but God has given me the victory' over the devil and he does not 
direct me except in what is good. Not one of the sons of Adam, 
except Mary' and her son Jesus, but is touched by the devil at 
birth — hence his cries.’ 

dimple: The allusion is often to a well or spring. 
dinar: Gold coin worth about two pounds today. 

DOGS: Unclean animals to Muslims, though hunting with 
trained dogs is permitted. A dog is able to see Azrael, the angel 
of death. 

EATING: Muslims are enjoined to eat in the name of God. The 
devil has power over food that is eaten without remembering God. 
When a man remembers the name of God, and remembers him- 
self, at meal times, the devil says to his demons: ‘This is no place 
for us: nor is there any food.’ 


( 143 ) 

FOUR GOLDEN WALLS: Points of the compass. 

genii: Good and evil spirits. Among them are Janns, Jinn, 
Shaitans, Ifrits and Marids. The evil Jinn are called by the 
Persians, Deves. 

god: There are a hundred names, or attributes of God. The first 
and last being Allah. 

green: For the Persian the colour of heaven is green. 

heaven: The firmament. Distinct from Paradise, the abode of 
bliss. There are seven heavens, and seven stages or seven paths 
in Heaven. Muhammad passed through the seven during the 
Mi’raj. 

hell: The Fire. Hell has seven doors or divisions. One is 
Jahannan, the purgatorial hell. 

hijra: ‘Migration.’ Flight of Muhammad from Mecca. Also 
‘fleeing from sin’. 

hoopoe: Hudhud, from its call. When Solomon had finished 
the temple he went on a pilgrimage to Mecca and from there to 
Arabia Felix. Needing water he called the Hoopoe, for she was 
able to discover water underground, and when she marked the 
place with her beak, the demons drew the water. The Hoopoe 
carried the letter from Solomon to Balkis, the Queen of Sheba. 
Reviewing the birds, Solomon said: ‘I do not see the Hudhud. 
Is she then among the absent?’ A mark on her beak resembles 
the Persian character ‘Bismillah’. Her ‘crown of glory’ is her 
crest. When its mate dies it does not take a new one; also, it cares 
for its parents. Muhammad forbade his people to kill it. 

hospitality: ‘Show kindness to your parents, to your 
kindred, to orphans, to your neighbours, to the companion who 
is strange, and to the son of the road ’, Koran. 

HUM A OR HUM ay: Bearded griffon. Largest of birds of prey in 
the Old World. Carries off bones of dead animals and smashes 
them against rocks for food. The shadow of a huma falling on 
a person’s head is a sign that he will be raised to a throne. 

idiot: Arabic, Madjnun. A person whose mind is in heaven, 
his body on earth. Whatever an idiot of God may do it does not 


( 144 ) 

affect his sanctity. In early English the Apostles and simple 
people were spoken of as idiots. ‘Holy and innocent idiots’, 
Jeremy Taylor. Greek, ‘a private person’. In some esoteric 
teachings: one who is freeing himself from inner and outer 
attachments. There are stages of this. Also used in the other 
sense: a fool, lunatic, impostor. 

ISP and: Herb, perhaps mustard, burnt at births and marriages 
to avert the evil eye. 

ishmael: The progenitor of the Arab race, an inspired pro- 
phet. Said to have been offered as a sacrifice, not Isaac. 

JESUS: Muhammad speaks of him as Son of Mary, the Messiah, 
Word of God, Word of Truth, Messenger from God. He was 
not crucified, but a substitute w'as put on the cross. Taken up 
to the seventh heaven, and by accident a needle and broken 
pitcher with him, against God’s command forbidding earthly 
things, for which he was brought down to the fourth heaven. 
But he will stay there in glory and come again at the last day. 
Often referred to as a fish, also by Attar. Greek for fish is IX0YI 
the initial letters of Iriaous Xpioros Geou Y\o% Icott^p Jesus Christ 
Son of God Saviour. 

JEWS: Were favoured by God. In possession of divine teaching, 
which they have forsaken. 

jihad: An effort, a striving. Sufis say there are two Jihads or 
warfares: the greater against our own faults and weaknesses, the 
lesser against the infidels. 

JOSEPH: Son of Jacob. An inspired prophet. Thrown into a 
well. After he was sold to the Egyptians his master’s wife 
Zulaikha fell in love wdth him and he with her. But because he 
would not yield she had him imprisoned. When her husband died 
she and Joseph were married and had two sons. One of the great 
love stories of the East is ‘Joseph and Zulaikha’. 

ka’aba: Cube. The cube-shaped stone building in the centre of 
the Mosque at Mecca. Contains the Hajaru’l-Aswad, or black 
stone which came from heaven white but has become black 
because of the sins of those who have touched it. 

kaf: Mountain range which surrounds the earth. 


( 145 ) 

AL kausar: ‘Abundance.’ A pool in Muhammad’s Paradise. 
khirka: Mande of the dervdshes, made of pieces and patches. 

AL khizr: Said to have lived in the time of Abraham, is stiU 
alive, for he drank of the water of life and thereby obtained 
immortality. 

knee: See ‘Shaikh and the old woman’. Allusion to a posture 
of the Sufis. 

korah: Numbers, Chap. i6. 

MAHMUD: A.D. 969-1030. One of the most famous of Musul- 
man rulers. His capital was at Nishapur; and his court at Gazna 
was the resort of poets, artists and the learned. 

AH ram: a near relative, whom it is not lawful to marry; so, 
an intimate. 

MASK ad: Seat of royalty, on which there is room for several 
persons. 

majnun: ‘Possessed by a Jinni.’ His passion for Laila is one of 
the great love stories of Persia. They fell in love at first sight but 
her father made her marry another man. Majnun spent the rest of 
his life half-naked, catching rare glimpses of Laila, and writing 
poems to her. Sufi writers use the story as a similitude for the 
man who gives up everything to be united to God. 

mihrab: Niche in a Mosque pointing to Mecca. 

MULE: Allusion to a custom in the East whereby women would 
convey letters or small precious objects secretly in the animal’s 
vagina. In Persia, thieves were marked on the shoulder. 

N.AFS: Has several aspects. One, the forces that move man 
through his centres. Another, the denying part. 

obol: a small coin in use in the Near East and Europe in early 
times. Worth about a threepenny bit. 

phoenix: Its ‘trumpet’ is an allusion to the last day. 

pir: An elder. Religious leader. Old man. 

pit: Dry cisterns and wells were used as prisons. 

